Living with Rheumatic Disease: Physiological Indicators Do Not Predict Quality 
of Life

Janet E. Jeffrey

Although physiological indicators are often used to determine disease 
severity, they do not account for how well adults "live with" rheumatic 
disease. One purpose of this study was to determine how cognitive factors 
mediate the relationship between disease severity and living with the disease. 
Over 120 adults with either rheumatoid arthritis (RA) or fibromyalgia (FS) 
completed a 2-phase study that included physical examination (measure of 
objective disease severity) and questionnaires (measure of subjective impact 
of symptoms, quality of life, depression, coping, and cognitive distortion). 
Characteristics were similar for both groups except RAs were older and had 
been diagnosed Ionger than FSs. At both data collections, subjects with FS 
reported greater severity and impact of symptoms measured on single item and 
multidimensional measures (p<.01). Subjects with FS were more depressed than 
RAs (p<.01), and had poorer quality of life in general and for domains of the 
Quality of Life Index - health/function, socioeconomic, psychological, and 
family (p<.01). A greater proportion (30%) of FSs reported their disease was 
worse at Phase 2 than Phase 1 vs RAs (19%), while 8% FS and 16% RA reported 
being better. Subjects who rated their disease as worse reported significantly 
greater severity and impact from symptoms, more depressive symptoms, and 
poorer quality of life than those who rated disease as better or unchanged 
(p<.01). Given there was no relationship between objective measures of disease 
activity and depression/quality of life, the structural model tested (using 
liseral and path analysis), examined cognitive factors as mediators between 
self-report (subjective) symptoms and depression/quality of life. This model 
held for RAs but not for the FSs. Although perceived impact of disease and 
change in disease status were strong predictors of quality of life, 
measurement of cognitive factors proved problematic and need study.

