Correlates of Health Service Utilization in At-Risk Community-Dwelling Older 
Adults

Cheryl Schrader and Paul Shelton

It is well documented that older adults are disproportionately heavy users of 
health services, accounting for just one-eighth of the total population, but 
accounting for more than one third of the total health care expenditures. This 
has stimulated an enormous amount of research on the health and service 
utilization patterns of elderly Americans. The purpose of this presentation is 
to discuss results of a screening tool correlated with utilization of selected 
health services in a sample of community-dwelling older adults. A sample of 
949 patients are participating in a geriatric collaborative team intervention. 
Utilizing a treatment (N=528): comparison (N=421) group methodology regression 
analysis was used to test the effects of the model on hospitalizations, length 
of stay, physician visits, medical specialist visits, emergency room visits, 
home health visits, and total utilization of all services. Using the screening 
tool, adjustments were made for age, gender, living status, medication intake, 
functional status, cognition, co-morbities, the presence of a caregiver, and 
the baseline measure of the variable under analysis. Significant differences 
were found between the treatment and comparison groups. The treatment group 
had a shorter length of stay when hospitalized (p<.05), utilized less 
physician (p<.01), medical specialist (p<.01) and emergency room services 
(p<.01) than the comparison group at 12 months. Statistical trends indicate 
that even though the treatment group was more impaired on functionality and 
health status measures, service utilization has been impacted by the treatment 
intervention. Clinicians are better equipped to target care for patients, 
families, and aggregates when they have pertinent and accessible information 
to help predict need for nursing care. Screening and demand management will 
become increasingly important as health services move to managed and capitated 
systems.

