Evaluating Staff Use of Crisis Prevention Intervention Techniques

Jaya Jambunathan and K. Bellaire

Violence in psychiatric hospitals is not uncommon, and psychiatric staff often 
work with patients who are agitated, uncooperative and potentially violent. 
For staff working with psychiatric patients, there is a possibility of being 
assaulted with resultant injuries, or having to intervene in an assault. 
Training clinical staff in the management of violent behavior may have the 
potential to reduce violent behavior by psychiatric patients, as well as staff 
injuries and reducing seclusion and restraints. The present sutdy ws conducted 
to evaluate staff use of crisis prevention intervention (CPI) training program 
techniques in averting crisis episodes, resulting in a reduction of seclusion 
and restraint episodes and staff-patient injuries.

A nonexperimental descriptive research design was used to answer the research 
questions: 1) What are the most frequent patient behavior cues identified and 
staff interventions initiated at the various levels (Anxiety, Defensive, 
Acting Out and Tension Reduction) of a crisis? 2) Is there a difference in 
staff use of interventions among different patient populations? 3) Is there a 
relationship between specific demographic variables such as patient diagnosis, 
hostory of violence, age, sex, type of unit, time of incident and the use of 
CPI techniques? Observational data on N=146 patient incidents were collected 
using a 51-item CPI instrument based on the CPI program techniques. 
Descriptive statistics, such as frequencies and Chi squares, ANOVA and Scheffe 
tests were completed to answer the research questions. Results indicated that 
there was a significant difference (p<.001) at the Defensive level of staff 
use of intervention, and few if any de-escalation techniques from the Anxiety 
(initial level) were used. Debriefing techniques after a crisis episode were 
used minimally. Results also indicated that 84.2% of the incidents observed 
were resolved without the use of restraint or seclusion, and no injuries to 
staff or patients were reported in 93.8% of the incidents. A follow-up 
longitudinal study based on the implication of this study is scheduled.

