Balance and Muscle Strength as Predictors of Frailty Among Older Adults

Nancy E. Dayhoff, J. Suhrheinrich, Robert Topp, Susan Moore, and J. 
Wigglesworth

Diminshed movement and perceived poor health are indicators of human fraily. 
Little is known about the contributions of impairments of balance and muscle 
strength to fraily among community-residing older adults. The purpose of this 
study was to develop empirically based criteria for classifying older adults 
as frail or nonfrail. Predictor variables suggested by literature included 
sensory organization of balance ankle and knee strength, and age. A step-wise 
discriminant analysis was performed to classify older adults who reported 
problems with performance of functional activities (World of Health 
Organization Assessment of FUnctional Capacity) and diminished perceived 
health, both indicators of frailty. Four conditions of sensory organization of 
balance, as measured by the Smart Balance Master (a computerized measure of 
stability), and isometric strength during dorsiflexion, plantar flexion and 
knee extension, as mesured by Microfet (a hand held manual muscle tester) were 
collected. Subjects were 84 adults living in a rural community, 60 to 88 years 
of age, who had volunteered for an exercise intervention study. Fifteen 
subjects were classified as frail. Contrary to expectations, only1 of the 4 
balance measurement condidtions (F=2.97, p<.04) and only dorisflexion muscle 
strength (F=3.14, p<.05) loaded on the discriminant function; 63.9% of the 
grouped cases (N=56) were correctly classified. The balance measure that 
loaded on teh function suggests the frail older adults make poor use of 
vestibular inputs when vision is absent and somatosensory system is perturbed. 
Poor dorsiflexion strength suggests the frail persons may have difficulty 
elevating the front part of the foot during the swing phase of gait and 
controlling the foot at heel strike. Impairments in these two conditions may 
be amenable to exercise interventions to improve these specific dimensions of 
balance and strength and contribute to decreased frailty. Implications for 
theory and practice will be discussed.

