Desaturation Events During Oral Feedings With and Without an NG Tube in VLBW 
Infants

Shyang-Yun Pam K. Shiao, J. Brooker, and T. DiFiore

The purpose of this study is to examine the desaturation events with the 
presenCe and absence    an                 an of   NG tube during   entire 
oral feeding in 20 verylowbirth~weight (VLBW) infants Infants                 
                                                                              
                               $1 were observed on postnatal days 17-82 days 
(49 + 18.91) during oral feedings, once with an NG tube and once without, at 9 
am and 3 pm feedings within one day, decided in random order.      Fifteen 
infants experienced 166 desaturation events (<90%), 83 desaturation events 
Without the NG tube and 83 events with the NG tube present. Infants who 
developed desaturation events had a longer transition period from tube 
feedings to oral feedings (p < .05), and started feedings with lower oxygen 
saturation (p < .05). Nearly all desaturation events (97%) occurred with 
breathing pauses (11.32 + 6.67 seconds), a change in heart rate, and an 
increase in ETCO2. The presence of                         l","' an NG tube 
increased the duration of desaturation by an average of 8 seconds (p <.05). 
Infants'                      ill ",1' l,~,,],,l,,;~,,4, 1,,, oxygen 
satrffation needs to be monitored with breathing and heart rate to prevent 
desaturation with feedings, and feedings may need to be started with a 
baseline lowest saturation of 95% or higher, *      This study is supported in 
part by Individual National Research Service Award Predoctoral         
Fellowship # F31 NR06796, Frances Payne Bolton School of Nursing Alurnni 
Research Award,                       `l"'lt;,', 1'             Sigma Theta 
Tau Alpha Mu Chapter Research Award.          PARENTS'               
PARTICIPATING IN RESEARCH INTERVIEWS ABoUT THEIR PERINATAL LOSS               
                ,, !`~`                                                       
                                                                    ,`it Karen 
Kavanauah, University of Illinois at Chicago College of Nursing, Chicago, 
Illinois         DESCRIPTIONS Of  The benefits of participating in research 
interviews have been identif ied in the qualitative research literature, and 
the theraPeutic value of having bereaved families tell the `story" of their 
loss has been described in the family therapy literature. The purpose of this 
study was to describe parents' responses to the experience of participating in 
research interviews during a phenomenological study of perinatal loss. For the 
phenomenological study, five mothers and three fathers who had experienced the 
recent death of a live-born infant weighing less than 500 grans at birth were 
interviewed two or three times. A total of 18 in-depth, open-ended interviews 
were conducted between four and fifteen, weeks after the loss. At the end of 
each interview, each parent was asked, `What was it like for you to 
participate in this interview today?6 The interviews, including this 
concluding question, had been tape-recorded and transcribed verbatim. for this 
study, a content analysis was performed for the concluding question using the 
typed transcripts for all interviews. Parents identified a number of benefits 
of participating in the interviews, including (a)  emotional relief; (b) an 
opportunity to help others, which for some parents gave meaning to their loss; 
(c) a better ~derstanding of their own experience, and (d) validation of their 
feelings. Parents also reported that they shared thoughts and feelings with 
the investigator that they had never shared with anyone else, and that the 
interviews gave parents a unique opportunity to tell their "who!e story". 
These findings suggest that participating in intensive research interviews can 
be therapeutIc for parents who have experienced a perinatal loss.

