Detrimental Effect of Dietary Restriction on Exercise-Induced Growth During 
Pregnancy

SeonAe Yeo, George Behrend, and Beth Boone

Voluntary endurance exercise induces an increase in basal pulsatile pituitary 
growth hormone (GH) secretion in mature women and hamsters, and this endocrine 
change is associated with increased utilization of lipids as a fuel, reduced 
body fat levels and, whenever nutrient energy is abundant, with increased 
growth in hamsters and modest increase in the lean body mass (LBM) in humans. 
Pregnancy imposes a significant energy drain in the female and in the humans 
is marked by cessation of pituitary GH secretion. Our interest was to find out 
whether (1) exercise can stimulate somatic and skeletal growth during 
pregnancy when the pituitary GH secretion is absent, (2) exercise can 
stimulate linear growth when energy cost of exercise is added to the energy 
cost of pregnancy, and (3) whether growth is possible when food restriction is 
added to exercise and pregnancy. The variables of voluntary exercise (21 
days), pregnancy (gestation=15 days), and food restriction (70% of ad lib) 
were applied in a 2 x 2 x 2 design with 6 to 12 animals in each block. We 
report here only the results for changes in body mass and skeletal length. 
Exercise induced a 31% increase in skeletal length and a 7% increase in body 
mass in non-pregnant animals. In pregnant ad libitum fed hamsters, exercise 
induced a 34% reduction in skeletal length and 10% increase in body mass. No 
growth was expressed during food restriction regardless of the reproductive 
condition. Exercise had no effect on fetal number regardless of the 
nutritional plane. The interaction of maternal food restriction and exercise 
did not have a significant negative effect on fetal mass. However, when food 
energy was limiting, voluntary exercise severely compromised maternal weight 
gain (p<.05). We conclude that when energy input is limited, additional energy 
loss is absorbed by the mother without compromising fetal growth at the 
applied energy restriction level.

