The Influence of Ovarian Steroids on Serotonin Overflow in the Amygdala of the 
Female Fluoxetine-Treated Rat

Geneal A. Brooks and M. D. Davis

Serotonin selective reuptake inhibitors (SSRI), such as fluoxetine (Prozac), 
are frequently used for the treatment of depression in women. Estrogen and/or 
progesterone are known to modify brain serotonin (5-HT) levels in a time- and 
region-specific manner in rats. The basolateral amygdala, involved in the 
modulation of mood, contains 5-HT neuronal pathways and estrogen and 
progesterone receptors. The presence or absence of plasma estrogen and/or 
progesterone may change the efficacy of SSRI in the basolateral amygdala. This 
study seeks to determine if serotonin overflow in the basolateral amygdala of 
fluoxetine-treated female rats is altered by the presence or absence of the 
ovarian steroids, estradiol (E2) and progesterone (P). Female rats are 
ovariectomized (ovx) and divided into four treatment groups representing 
different stages in the rat estrus cycle: 91) ovx rats receiving three 
consecutive daily injections of E2 and on day four, P; (2) ovx rats receiving 
three consecutive daily injections of E2 with vehicle on day four, (3) ovx 
rats receiving three consecutive daily injections of vehicle and P on day 
four; and (4) ovx rats receiving four consecutive daily injections of vehicle. 
Extracellular substances from the basolateral amygdala of these rats are 
collected by microdialysis and analyzed with high pressure liquid 
chromatography (HPLC) using electrochemical detection to determine serotonin 
overflow in response to acute fluoxetine treatment in all groups. It is 
hypothesized that in ovariectomized animals, those receiving estradiol 
injections will show higher serotonin overflow in response to fluoxetine when 
compared to those fluoxetine-treated animals receiving vehicle alone. 
Treatment with P in E2-primed animals is expected to dampen the effort of E2 
on serotonin overflow. Results and implications will be discussed.
