Experiences of Pain and Comfort in Hospitalized Children

Shirley Wiggins, N. Hester, and R. Foster

Research indicates that lack of knowledge about pediatric pain contributes to 
ineffective nursing assessment and management of children's apin. The purpose 
of this study was to describe children's pain experiences from the perceptions 
of children and their parents. The Agency for Health Care Policy and research 
(AHCPR) guidelines were used as a framework for this qualitative-descriptive 
study. Data were gathered using the "Pain Experience History" as the interview 
guide. Interviews were completed with a sample of twenty-two verbal children 
and their parents and a sample of eleven parents of preverbal children. 
Questions on the "Pain Experience History" were open-ended, therefore content 
analysis was used to identify categories. Descriptive statistics (e.g. 
frequency distributions) were applied to the categores. Five themes emerged 
from the analysis of the child/parent interviews and included: How children 
share their experiences of pain; How children wanted others to help when they 
hurt; What children do not want when they hurt; How children help themselves 
when they hurt; and Who (educates) talks with children about their pain. 
Findings from the verbal child interviews also identified the words children 
used for pain and the comfort strategies they used. Of the 77% of the verbal 
children who reported their pain to someone, 64% of this group stated they 
report their pain to their parents. Eighty-two percent of the parents of 
preverbal children recognized their child's pain by a change in their crying 
pattern. Eighty-two percent of the parents of preverbal children and 68% of 
the verbal children reported they had not received pain management education. 
Conclusions derived from the findings indicated children can and do describe 
their painful experiences, but their responses differed by age; presence and 
touch are powerful comfort measures; children do attempt to comfort 
themselves, but also want others to help; and finally parents and children 
need to receive pain management education.

