The Effects of Implementing Patient-Focused Care Model on the Role of Nurse 
Manager

Richard W. Redman and Katherine R. Jones

Workplace restructuring typically attempts to redesign the nursing care 
delivery model from a department to a patient centered focus. Ancillary 
services have been brought into nursing's sphere of control and unit-based 
multifunctional roles have been created to function under the supervision of 
the RN. Evaluation of these models has been limited and generally focuses on 
the reaction of various stakeholders or costs of the models. We examined the 
impact of implementing patient-focused care models on the role of the nurse 
manager in two acute care hospitals. Interviews were conducted with 
approximately 20 nurse and department managers with direct responsibility for 
implementing the new roles and structure of care delivery. The structured 
interviews were conducted within the first 6 months of model implementation. 
Interview questions focused on the managers' perceived advantages and barriers 
to implementation of the model, the impact of the models on the unit working 
environment, expected outcomes for patients and the organization, and the 
changes that resulted in their managerial roles as a result of the 
restructuring effort. Results of these interviews indicate that the role of 
the unit-based manager is significantly influenced by the redesign of 
caregiver roles. It becomes increasingly complex as unskilled workers are 
brought onto the caregiving team and ancillary services become the 
responsibility of the unit. General issues include managing larger numbers of 
nonprofessional workers, recruitment, retention, and attendance problems, and 
team dynamics. Specific issues relate to respiratory treatments and 
environmental services regulatory standards and supplies. Non-nursing 
department managers tend to have different views than nurse managers. 
Implications for organizations considering similar innovations will be 
presented.

