How Do Nurses Spend Their Time?

Linda D. Urden and Jeanne Roode

Dynamic changes in health care require accurate data on which decisions can be 
made. By examining processes and systems of current practice, areas for 
improvement can be identified with subsequent strategies to implement change. 
The purpose of this study was to 1) Determine the amount of time that RNs and 
Nurse Extenders spend in various direct and indirect patient care activities; 
2) Describe the differences in time among nursing unit specialties; and 3) 
Examine shift variations in time. This descriptive study utilized work 
sampling to collect data to examine the distribution of staff work activities. 
The data collection instrument was developed by a research team who pilot-
tested it and made minor revisions. Inter-rater reliability of all data 
collectors was established with 80% agreement. Data were collected on all 
nursing units on all shifts within the 529-bed community teaching hospital 
during a six-week period. Unit demographics, such as unit census, workload 
index, staff mix, and variation from staffing categories: direct care, 
indirect care, documentation, unit-related, and personal Registered Nurse time 
spent in the various activities were: 36% direct care; 24% indirect care; 4% 
unit-related; 26% documentation; and 15% personal. Nurse Extenders (LPNs and 
non-licensed direct care givers) spent the following: 35% direct care; 24% 
indirect care; 10% unit-related; 15% documentation; and 16% personal. There 
were differences between shifts and among the various nursing unit specialties 
in the amount of time for both categories of caregivers. This study provides 
essential information for the evaluation of any programmatic, staff mix, or 
work redesign change that may occur in the future. In our immediate future is 
the implementation of a computerized documentation system; study data will be 
utilized to evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of such a costly 
financial investment. The data will also be used to examine other quality and 
fiscal variables that impact the delivery of patient care.

