A Comparison of the Level of Hope in Newly Diagnosed Cancer Patients and 
Patients with Recurrent Cancer

Angela Ballard, Teresa Green, and Aimee McCaa

Hope has long been recognized as a necessary component for a good quality of 
life. Even in the face of life threatening disease, such as cancer, hope has 
been found to sustain individuals through cancer diagnosis, treatment, and/or 
recurrence. Expectations were that levels of hope would decrease with 
recurrence of cancer, and that females and married individuals would have more 
hope. Oncology physician practices in two urban areas of the southern United 
States were utilized to recruit a convenience sample of 38 cancer patients. 
Subjects completed the Herth Hope Scale, a 30 item four point likert tool. 
Following the completion of the HHS, subjects were asked to respond to an 
open-ended question, "What is giving you the most hope at this present time?". 
For this study the reliability of the HHS was .8334. The internal consistency 
for each factor follows: Factor I (Temporality and Future) a=.6921, Factor II 
(Positive Readiness and Expectancy) a=.5589, and Factor III 
(Interconnectedness) a=.6291. On average, the sample was Caucasian (89.5%), 56 
years of age (SD=13.55), female (68.4%), married (68.5%), and had a high 
school degree or GED (36.8%). A religious affiliation was reported by (89.5%) 
of the sample subjects. Contrary to expectations, newly diagnosed and 
recurrent cancer patients did not differ as to the level of hope experienced. 
However, significant differences were found in the type of hope utilized by 
cancer patients (F (72,2) = 16.71, p = .00). Married cancer patients and males 
both experienced higher levels of hope. From the open-ended question 
concerning hope at present time, recurrent themes were: family support, 
non-family support, faith, outlook, and health professionals/care. Although 
the results of this study are preliminary, nurses need to be aware that newly 
diagnosed cancer patients look to health care professionals, and their 
treatments for hope and support.

