An Examination of Demographic Characteristics and Mental Health Status Among 
Southeast Asian Refugee Women

Mayumi Anne Willgerodt

To date, research on the needs of Southeast Asian (SEA) refugees has focused 
mainly on men and has not been gender specific. Despite evidence that SEA 
Women are at higher risk for depression, present studies have not adequately 
explored the variables that may be associated with mental health problems in 
this group. The Stressful Life Events Model was used as the conceptual 
framework to guide a secondary analysis of an existing data base to: 1) 
describe the characteristics of age, ethnicity, marital status, length of 
residence in the US, education, occupational change, and religion pre- and 
post migration, and 2) explore the relationships between those variables and 
mental health status. Data on a sample of 169 Cambodian, Vietnamese, and 
Laotian women recruited via an urban public school system were analyzed. 
Mental health was measured utilizing the Hopkins Symptom Checklist 25 (HSCL) 
which has established validity and reliability in this population. 
Characteristics of this sample are described using measures of central 
tendency and comparison of means. Correlations and one-way analyses of 
variance demonstrated a significant positive relationship between length of 
residence and mean HSCL scores whereas a significant negative relationship was 
found between education and mean HSCL scores. An examination of the 
relationship of mean mental health status scores indicated that marital 
status, religion, and occupational change were important mediators of stress 
in mental health. Multiple regression analyses were conducted to identify the 
unique contribution of those variables to the variance in depression; 
ethnicity, education, and social support defined as marital status and 
religious affiliation. These variables accounted for approximately 40% of the 
variance in this study. The findings will be useful for future research and 
practice with refugee women.

