Co-Regulation of VLBW Infant Feeding: Mothers' Working Models of Feeding

Suzanne M. Thoyre

Co-regulation is the process by which infants and their caregivers negotiate 
the activity of feeding (Fogel, 1993). Understanding co-regulation from the 
parent's perspective can guide nurses as they support the development of 
parent's feeding practices with their VLBW infants. Co-regulation includes 
features of active participation, goal orientation (i.e., regulation) and 
relationship with another. Both caregivers' working models of feeding and 
their feeding skills and infants' regulatory capacities and their feeding 
skills constrain the process of co-regulated feeding. The purpose of this 
study is to explore how mothers view the process of very low birthweight 
(VLBW) infant feeding and how they describe being with their infants during 
feeding. Twenty-five VLBW infants and their mothers were video-taped during a 
feeding prior to discharge from the NICU. Following the feeding, mothers were 
interviewed using The Joint Exploration of Parent's Working Model of Feeding 
(Pridham, 1995) and interviews were coded on a six-point scale using Pridham's 
method of examining working models of feeding (Pridham, Schroeder, Van Riper, 
Thoyre, Oleson & Mlynarczyk, 1995). Coded dimensions of co-regulation include: 
(a) how the mother views the infant's and her own participation in the 
feeding; (b) the extent to which the mother shares responsibility for the 
feeding process and outcome with the infant; (c) the support the mother 
describes the infant needs and the extent to which the mother aims to support 
her infant in becoming a fuller participant in the feeding process; and (d) 
how the mother views the relationship she is developing with her infant as 
having regulator functions. Transcribed interview quotes will be used to 
elaborate the definition of co-regulation, to illustrate the rating scale, and 
to share how co-regulation is characterized in mothers' working models of 
feeding. Implications for practice and future research will be explored.
