Finding Meaning, Spirituality, Perceived Stress, and Psychological Distress in 
Breast Cancer Survivors and A Comparison Group of Healthy Women

Susan M. Bauer, Carol J. Farran, Janice M. Zeller, Louis Fogg, David F. Cella, 
George Fitchett, and Kathleen Knafl

Purpose: to explore finding meaning, spirituality, perceived stress, and 
psychological distress in breast cancer survivors (BCS) (n=39) and a 
comparison group of healthy women (CW) (n=39). In 1995 183,000 American women 
were diagnosed with breast cancer; the majority will survive > 5 years. 
Although breast cancer has been associated with negative consequences, there 
is increasing evidence to suggest positive psycho-spiritual outcomes. Other 
research has found such outcomes to be associated with lower stress and 
stress-related health outcomes.

Conceptual Framework: an integration of Lazarus' and Folkman's stress-coping 
model with existential concepts.

Questions: (1) Do demographic factors have an effect on measures of finding 
meaning, spirituality, perceived stress, and psychological distress?; (2) What 
are the relationships between finding meaning, spirituality, perceived stress, 
and psychological distress?; and (3) Are there significant differences between 
BCSs and CWs on these variables?

Method: descriptive 2 group design utilizing mailed surveys administered to an 
unmatched convenience sample (88% response rate). The survey included: Life 
Attitude Profiles, Index of Core Spiritual Experiences, Brief POMS and 
Perceived Stress Scale.

Analysis: oneway analysis of variance, correlations, principal components 
analysis, MANOVA, ANCOVA, and t-tests.

Findings: There was significantly high variance within the BCS group on all 
study measures, with the presence or absence of children being a major 
contributor to the observed variance. Differences in finding meaning and 
spirituality were identified based on marital status, socio-economic status, 
religion, and age. The findings also support a conceptual framework that 
integrates existential and stress-coping perspectives.

Implications: Despite sampling limitations, results support facilitation of 
breast cancer survivors, to work through existential concerns as a vehicle to 
alleviate stress and associated mental and physical consequences. Confirmatory 
research including physiological measures is now in progress.

