Health Care Treatment Decisions: Agreement Between Critical Care Nurses and 
Proxies

Joyce A. Neal

Autonomy, the right to determine one's course of action, has become the 
dominant ethical principle in the United States. In case of incapacity, 
honoring the prior expressed health care treatment wishes of an individual as 
stated in an advance directive preserves his/her autonomy. Often proxies, 
substitute decision makers, do not make decisions based on the patient's prior 
expressed wishes because of a lack of knowledge of those wishes. Critical care 
nurses (ccns) were chosen as the subjects for this study because in an 
intensive care unit they play an important role in the preservation of patient 
autonomy as they are frequently involved in discussions with patients and/or 
families regarding life-sustaining treatment decisions. Because of the pivotal 
position of ccns, this study seeks to learn: a) if ccns have executed advance 
directives, b) if ccns have discussed their preferences for life-sustaining 
treatments with their family, physician, and designated proxy, and c) if the 
treatment choices of ccns and their designated proxy agree using the scenarios 
and treatment choices from The Medical Directive. The ethical principle of 
autonomy provides the conceptual framework for this study. This study employs 
a comparative descriptive design to examine and describe the differences and 
similarities in health care treatment choices between a group of ccns and 
their proxies. Questionnaires were mailed for the nurse and the proxy to a 
random sample of 150 intensive care staff nurses who are members of the 
American Association of Critical Care Nurses. Descriptive statistics will be 
calculated. The kappa statistic will be used to measure concordance between 
ccns and proxies. This study is needed to provide the foundation for future 
research related to the advocacy role of ccns in helping patients to 
articulate their preferences for life-sustaining treatments and how this role 
influences the outcome of better quality patient care.

