Meperidine Utilization and Compliance with AHCPR Guidelines at a Tertiary Care 
Hospital

Joseph Pellegrini and Judith Paice

Significance: The Agency for Health Care Policy and Research (AHCPR) 
established guidelines for the use of meperidine, a common inpatient 
analgesic. Despite these guideline, the literature continues to indicate 
inappropriate practitioner use and inadequate patient pain control. The 
question emerges: Who does not receive meperidine consistent with AHCPR 
guidelines?

Method: A perspective descriptive study, 300 inpatient charts reviewed at an 
urban academic medical center with an active pain service and pain research 
program, revealed 157 non-obstetrical patients had received meperidine, as the 
primary analgesic, in > 1 dose. Chart review included: age, sex, weight, 
dosing interval, route of administration, duration of meperidine use, serum 
chemistry values, primary diagnosis, associated medical conditions and 
concurrent medication use. 124 patients were found to be given meperidine to 
conflict with AHCPR guidelines regarding age, pain chronicity, presence of 
cancer, renal failure, or on drugs that are contraindicated when using 
meperidine. 20 patients were unable to be interviewed. The remaining 104 
patients were interviewed using an author designed questionnaire to ascertain 
medical and drug history, chronic pain syndromes, analgesic drug history and 
episodes of confusion and anxiety attributable to meperidine. Pain was 
ascertained using VAS (range=1 to 10), and analgesia satisfaction (range 1-5) 
scales.

Results: Subjects were found to be equally distributed by gender, and acute 
vs. chronic pain. The mean age was 49. Most frequent dosing schedule was 50 mg 
IM q4h prn, (mean 24 dose = 150mg). Median length of meperidine administration 
was 2 days (range 1 to 58 days). 40 percent received concurrent analgesics, 
most commonly, Vicodin. The group who received concurrent analgesics and < 500 
mg meperidine in 24 hours reported significantly higher satisfaction scores 
than the group who received only meperidine (p<.001). Nine percent were found 
to be on medications contraindicated with meperidine, but no adverse effects 
were noted. No differences in pain control satisfaction (p=.40377) were noted 
by pain chronicity status. No significant increase in anxiety or confusion was 
noted except when correlated with age (p=.02). Although 15 patients were found 
to be in moderate to severe renal failure, no unequal distribution of 
increased confusion, anxiety or delirium was noted.

Discussion and Implications: Meperidine continues to be prescribed contrary to 
AHCPR guidelines. Because of the potential for unfavorable outcomes, 
replication of this study in multiple institutions and across the patient's 
entire hospitalization is warranted.

