Perceived Needs of Parents of Critically Ill Children

Linda D. Scott

Researchers have examined the perceived needs of family members of critically 
ill adults. In the pediatric population, research has been limited to 
noncrisis hospitalization. Recent research has begun to explore unexpected 
pediatric critical care admissions and parental needs. The purpose of this 
study was to (a) identify the perceived needs of parents of critically ill 
hospitalized children, (b) identify parental needs as perceived by critical 
care nurses, and (c) identify the differences in these perceptions. Crisis 
theory ad King's (1981) conceptual framework for nursing provided the 
theoretical foundation. A descriptive research design with a non-probability 
convenience sample consisting of 30 parents or primary caretakers of 
critically ill children and 30 pediatric critical care nurses was used in this 
study. Data were obtained by a structured interview using a 53 item modified 
version of Molter's (1979) CCFNI. Data analysis included a comparison of the 
relationship of total scorn between the parents and nurses. No significant 
differences were found between the two groups by a two-tailed paired t-test. 
The specific perceived needs identified by the parents and nurses were 
analyzed using rank ordering and the Wilcoxin matched-pairs signed ranks test. 
Overall, the parents and the nurses identified similar prioritization of need 
statements. Significant differences were noted between parent/nurse matched 
pairs on approximately a quarter of the items. Information, assurance and 
proximity to the critically ill child were identified as priority needs of the 
parents in this study. By consistently incorporating these perceived needs 
identified by the parents into the plan of care, nurses can assist the parents 
in the identification and fulfillment of support, comfort and self-care needs 
that had less perceived importance. This study supports the need to 
investigate interventions to better address parental needs of critically ill 
children. Research based interventions will facilitate improved parental 
adaptation to their child's critical hospitalization.
