Risks of Gestational Diabetes in Northern Plains Native American Women

Mary Lynn Eaglestaff

Up to 30% of northern plains Native American women will experience the risks 
of gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) within this year, and because of the 
poor screening protocol developed in workIng with these women, the numbers are 
likely to be more (Welty, 1993). In comparison, 2 to 3% of the general 
population of American pregnant women will experience gestational diabetes 
(Tinker, 1994). Gestational diabetes causes maternal-mortality rates to double 
within the Native American population with a rate of 19.9% deaths per 100,000 
women (van Breda, 1989). Because the risks of gestational diabetes can include 
increased likelihood of preeclampsia and eclampsia, macrosomia congenital 
anomalies, and increased frequency of cesarian section due to deteriorating 
fetal conditions, the implications for long term effects to the child and 
mother present serious health concerns that good nursing care can have an 
impact on (Gunderson, 1992, Rith-Najarian, Ness, Faulhaber & Godhes, in press, 
van Breda, 1989). The purpose of this ongoing observational study is to 
examine the incidence and risks of gestational diabetes in 100 randomly 
selected northern plains pregnant women. Orem's Theory of Self-Deficit is 
guiding the study. It is hypothesized that there will be significant 
differences between GDM occurrences in Native American and Euro American 
pregnant women and measures of the 1-hour glucose tolerance test (GTT), 
activity levels, anthropometric and demographic data, maternal health risks, 
self-care agency and wellbeing. Data will be collected at 12-18 weeks of 
pregnancy, 26-32 weeks of pregnancy, and within 4 weeks of delivery. 
Distributions will be obtained for the above defined measures. Differences 
will be analyzed between the groups of women experiencing GDM and those 
asymptomatic for GDM over time using the repeated measures ANOVA. Nurses need 
to work more closely within ethnic and cultural practices when counseling 
at-risk northern plains Native American pregnant women for dietary and 
exercise practices.

