Perceived Uncertainty, appraisal, and Hope in Women with Breast Cancer

Sharon A. Willadsen

The purpose of this study was to investigate the relationships among perceived 
uncertainty, appraisal of the event of breast cancer and hope in women with 
breast cancer.

The 50 subjects in the study was obtained from three outpatient oncology 
clinics. Respondents provided demographic and medically related information, 
scores on the Miller Hope Scale, the Mishel Uncertainty in Illness Scale, and 
an Appraisal Scale developed for this study.

The data were analyzed using descriptive and correlational statistics. 
Relationships between variables were established using Pearson correlation 
coefficients. Multiple regression, using stepwise regression, was employed to 
obtain the most significant predictors of hope as multicolinearity was not 
problematic. The alpha level was set at .05.

Significant negative correlations were found between hope and elevated 
perceptions of uncertainty (r=-.64) as well as elevated perceptions of 
ambiguity (r=-.55), complexity (r=-.69), inconsistency (r=-.50), and 
unpredictability (r=.31). The appraisal of breast cancer as an opportunity was 
strongly and statistically related to hope (r=.714).

Appraisal of breast cancer as an opportunity was found to be the best 
predictor of the level of hope in women with breast cancer. Decreased 
perceptions of uncertainty were also found to be predictive of hope. Together 
these two variables accounted for 56.9% of the variance in hope. Number of 
physical symptoms, time since diagnosis, and number of positive axillary nodes 
were found not to be significant predictors of hope.

The findings offer guidance in the design of nursing interventions to enhance 
the level of hope in women with breast cancer. To enhance a positive appraisal 
of the event of breast cancer experience, it is important to assist women to 
focus on a future that is possible and has rewards for them. Interventions are 
offered that provide this sense of future. To diminish the effects of 
perceived uncertainty on hopefulness, it is important to assist women in 
understanding breast cancer and its treatment. Providing consistent 
information, supporting efforts at coping, listening to, and validating 
feelings are ways nurses may be able to assist women in reevaluating the 
perceptions of uncertainty and its relationship to their experience with 
breast cancer.

