Health and Educational Needs of Homeless Adolescents

Joyce Splann Krothe and Patricia N. Allen

In the last two decades the incidence of homeless adolescents has emerged as 
one of the most salient social problems in America. In 1989 the National 
Association of State Boards of Education focused national attention on the 
dangerous trends in adolescent health and the need to take action to reverse 
them in order to decrease health problems that interfere with learning. In 
1992 their publication Code Blue became the stimulus for communities, 
including Monroe County, Indiana, to organize task forces to respond to the 
findings of the study at the local level.

Homeless adolescents in any community present a multi-sectorial challenge. 
Their high-risk existence leads to individual morbidity and negatively impacts 
the health of the community. Identifying these adolescents and responding to 
their perceived needs becomes a shared responsibility for health care 
providers and educators. Using qualitative methods of key informant/homeless 
adolescent interviews, the research foci of this study included the following: 
(1) to identify homeless adolescents in Monroe County, Indiana; (2) to assess 
health and educational needs of the adolescents; and (3) to develop an 
interdisciplinary model for identifying homeless adolescents in other 
communities.

The findings of this study indicate that "homeless" is not the most accurate 
term to describe these adolescents. The descriptor "on their own" more 
accurately defines their living situation. Lack of access to primary health 
care was found to be a major factor affecting morbidity rates and in turn the 
adolescents ability to meet their educational needs. This paper will present 
the findings related to the health and educational needs assessment and 
provide suggestions for developing a model to identify adolescents living "on 
their own" in other communities. Implications for nursing's role in addressing 
their health care needs and implications for further study will be discussed.

