School-Age Child Behavior Outcomes of Prenatal Cocaine Exposure

V. Delaney-Black, Chandice Covington, T. Templin, R. Sokol, J. Ager, and S. 
Martier

Anecdotal reports from elementary teachers suggest that children exposed 
prenatally to cocaine demonstrate unique behaviors. While a projected one 
million exposed children will have entered the school system by 1995, no 
substantive data have been reported to validate these reports. A historical, 
prospective design was used to examine the influence of prenatal cocaine and 
alcohol exposures on child behaviors in the school setting. Maternal subjects 
(N=140) from a larger, prospective fetal research study were contacted and 116 
agreed to have their six year old singleton, term (> 36 weeks) child 
participate in this study. After informed consent, the mothers were 
interviewed by phone regarding demographic and SES factors and parental rating 
of child behavior. The child's first grade teacher, who was blinded to both 
study design and exposure status, rated the child's behavior with the Conners' 
Teacher Rating Scale, a 39-item instrument with reliability and validity that 
measures problem behaviors on a 4-point scale and an investigator-developed 14 
item, 10-point, visual analog scale, the PROBS, which measures behaviors 
posited to be specific to cocaine exposure. Significant positive relationships 
existed between cocaine exposure and prenatal maternal cigarette use and 
early, but not later, pregnancy alcohol exposure (p<0.05). A significant 
negative relationship existed between cocaine exposure and birth weight 
(p<0.05). After controlling for the influence of gender and alcohol exposure, 
the EXP group was assessed by teachers as demonstrating the problem behavior 
or "daydream" on the CTRS significantly more than the CONT group (one tailed, 
P=.02) and a significantly greater degree of problem behaviors on 5 of the 14 
PROBS items (distractibility, social skills, disorganization, transitions, and 
sensory overload; one tailed, (p<.05). On 12 of the 14 PROBS indicators of 
problem behaviors, the EXP group were rated higher than the CONT group (Wilkes 
O=.775, p=.027). This pilot study supports that teachers blinded to the 
exposure status of first grade students rated the EXP group as demonstrating 
significantly more problem behaviors than the CONT group. A larger, 
NIDA-funded study is underway to further delineate the influence of prenatal 
exposures on child school outcomes.

