Urban School Nursing: Prevention, The Goal; Cultural Distinction, The 
Challenge

Sharon L. Pontious and D. Hecke

Current literature documents a urgent need for healthcare services to move 
from the acute care reactive model to the proactive community model of disease 
prevention and health promotion. Increasing access to healthcare facilitates 
services for people who are underserved and who may also be uninsured. Healthy 
Foundations (HF), a community initiated, multi-agency school health 
partnership was formed to provide health promotion disease prevention, 
education and referral services for 700 children and their families from a 
culturally distinct community. A cross-sectional descriptive study compared 
incidence rates of selected common school health problems with other 
comparative populations. There was a 2-4 times greater referral rate following 
vision, hearing and scoliosis screenings in this sample and a 10 times greater 
rate of immunization non-compliance. During the first year of the HF program, 
the incidence of pediculosis was markedly deceased, saving approximately 
10,640 educational hours and a shigella outbreak was contained through 
increased education, awareness and accessibility of free services. Success of 
the program is evidenced by an ardent request for expansion to include an 
additional 250 children who attend a large daycare and early childhood 
education program of the same ethnic orientation.


\\\\\\
Voices of Impoverished Brazilian Women: Health Implications of Roles and 
Resources

Joanne M. Hall

Long hours women spend in child care and house work occur in the informal 
sector and consist of a type of production that has been largely ignored by 
economists and politicians around the world. The non-remunerated work women do 
ensuring the maintenance and survival of their families is invisible, not 
counted in international labor force and income statistics. This qualitative 
interview study was undertaken with a group of 75 Brazilian women who live in 
an impoverished squatter community in the mountains surrounding a newly 
urbanized area near Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. The convenience sample was 
recruited via door-to-door visitation by a bilingual U.S. nurse and a local 
key informant, the health post nurse. The purposes of the study were to 
describe women's role involvement in domestic and employment contexts, and 
assess personal and environmental resources. Content analysis yielded thematic 
descriptions of women's unrelenting work in the face of harsh social and 
economic environments, burdens of poverty, and role involvement characterized 
by disconnectedness, abuse, and lack of support by their partners. This 
confluence of constraints forced participants to be inwardly directed, relying 
on their intrapersonal resources of will, faith in God, patience, and 
self-deprivation to overcome great adversity and meet heavy role demands. 
Implications for the development of international resources and policies that 
can support impoverished women in maintaining their health and that of their 
families are discussed.

