Risk Factors for Attentional Deficits in Women Treated for Breast Cancer

Bernadine Cimprich

The ability to attend to self care activities is often altered in women 
treated for breast cancer, however, little is known about factors that might 
increase the risk of such impaired cognitive function. This study was 
conducted to determine whether age and extent of surgery might increase the 
risk of early loss of attention over the pre-surgical to pre-adjuvant therapy 
phase of illness in 39 women newly diagnosed with Stage I or II breast cancer. 
Subjects were assessed with a battery of measures of the capacity to direct 
attention (CDA) (Digit Span, Symbol Digit Modalities Test and Necker Cube 
Pattern Control) in the pre-surgical work-up period (Time 1) and again before 
the start of adjuvant therapy at about 3 weeks after surgery (Time 2). There 
was no differences in attentional performance by age (< 55 years vs. > 55 
years) or surgical (mastectomy vs. breast conservation) subgroups at Time 1. 
However, age and extent of surgery independently had significant influences on 
the pattern of attentional changes observed at Time 2. Older subjects (> 55 
years) (n=14) showed more severe attentional impairment than did younger 
subjects (n=25) at Time 2. Similarly, mastectomy patients (n=24), regardless 
of age, showed significantly greater losses in CDA at Time 2 as compared to 
subjects who had breast conserving surgery (n=15). Notably, pre-treatment 
attention scores were significantly positively correlated with post-surgical 
attention scores. Thus, the three independent variables, pre-treatment 
attentional performance, age and extent of surgery together accounted for 49% 
of the variance (Multiple R=.60, F=20.66, p=.0001) in attention scores at Time 
2. These findings suggest that older age, more extensive surgery and a 
compromised pre-treatment attentional state contribute to the severity of loss 
of attention following breast cancer surgery. The findings hold significant 
clinical implications for early therapeutic intervention aimed at improving 
cognitive function in women treated for breast cancer.

