The Quality of Life of African-American Women with Breast Cancer

Laurel Northouse, L. Guziatek-Trojniak, L. Gatzke Schmidt, and S. West

Breast cancer poses a significant health threat to African-American women. 
They are often diagnosed with an advanced stage of breast cancer and their 
survival rates are significantly lower than Caucasian women. In spite of the 
negative effect that breast cancer can have on the health and well-being of 
African-American women, few studies have assessed their quality of life 
following the diagnosis of breast cancer. The purpose of this study was to 
examine the quality of life of African-American women with breast cancer. The 
study also assessed women's optimism, family functioning, symptom distress, 
current concerns, coping strategies, and overall appraisal of their illness. 
Oberst's framework of stress and coping provided the theoretical basis for the 
study. The sample consisted of 98 African-American women with breast cancer 
who were approximately 3 years (median) postdiagnosis. Multiple standardized 
instruments with established reliability and validity were used to measure 
study variables: Life Orientation Test, Family APGAR, Omega Screening 
Inventory, Brief COPE, Appraisal of Illness Scale and the FACT-B. Descriptive 
statistics, ANOVA and t-tests were used to assess study variables. The results 
indicated that this sample of African-American women had a relatively high 
quality of life when compared to other samples of cancer patients. Women with 
lower quality of life had a more advanced stage of cancer or a recurrence of 
their disease. The types of coping strategies most often used by women were 
emotional support, acceptance and religion. In general this sample of women 
was fairly optimistic, had good family functioning and little symptom 
distress. The implications of this study suggest that clinicians need to 
direct greater attention to African-American women with advanced or recurrent 
breast cancer because they are at risk of lower quality of life.

