Coping With The Stress of Premature Labor

Ann Herman Lowenkron

Premature birth, the leading cause of perinatal morbidity and mortality in the 
United States, affects between 8% and 12% of all live births. Approximately 
80% of premature births are proceeded by premature labor. Significant progress 
has been made in physical treatments to suppress premature labor, however, the 
psychological cost to women being treated had yet to be studied 
systematically. The purpose of this study was to assess the stress experienced 
by women treated at home for premature labor and to examine methods used by 
the women to cope. The theoretical framework was provided by Lazarus's model 
of Stress, Coping and Emotion. A total of 50 women participated. Twenty 
responded to a questionnaire that included the Perceived Stress Scale, the 
Ways of Coping Questionnaire, the Revised Health Locus of Control Scale, 
Rosenberg's Self-Esteem Scale, the Sense of Mastery Scale and the MOS Social 
Support Survey only, 10 were interviewed only; and 20 completed the 
questionnaire and interview. Results: The women reported experiencing a 
moderate among of stress. Their mean stress score was 26.75, just below the 
mean for the instrument (M=28). Appraisal was assessed by analyzing data from 
interviews. The women appraised their situation as both threatening and 
challenging. They described their emotional response as frustration because of 
fear about pregnancy outcome, loss of control over their life, and inability 
to perform usual roles. Strategies from the Ways of Coping questionnaire 
subscales of Seeking Social Support, Planful Problem-Solving and Positive 
Reappraisal were used to cope. The women reported an external locus of 
control, a high sense of master, and high self-esteem. High Expectancy of 
Control (a variable created by combining measurements of locus of control, 
sense of mastery, and self-esteem), and the buffering effect of social support 
served to modify the coping process.

