Centering Pregnancy: A Model for Group Prenatal Care

Marjorie J. Smith and Sharon S. Rising

Traditional prenatal care involves assessment of the mother/fetus dyad's 
progression as well as screening for problems in one-to-one visits throughout 
pregnancy. Education for childbirth and parenting is fragmented and sporadic. 
In the Centering Pregnancy Model, care is taken out of examination room and 
placed within a large conference room where women receive their basic prenatal 
assessment, talk informally, and learn about pregnancy, birth, and parenting. 
The 9 sessions during pregnancy and 1-2 postpartum are led by a nurse-midwife 
or nurse practitioner who also coordinates the assessment component. Women are 
grouped roughly by due dates and gather for prenatal visits every 2-4 weeks. 
At these visits, standard prenatal risk assessment is done, health promotion 
and education follow that utilize an instructional and discussion format, and 
time is provided for women to talk. By incorporating these 3 components of 
risk assessment, education, and support in all visits, each is given equal 
emphasis. Assessment and evaluation tools are used throughout the sessions. 
Outcomes in terms of maternal and newborn morbidity are comparable to women 
who received traditional care in the same setting. 96% of the women preferred 
their care in a group.

Focus groups, used to supplement the project evaluation, were held with three 
groups of mothers, a group of clinic nurses, a group of in-patient nurses, and 
with a social worker and physical therapist after 15 groups (N=113) had 
completed the program. Interview questions were based on the objectives of the 
Centering Pregnancy Program, its advantages and disadvantages, and changes 
participants would recommend. Results indicated overwhelming satisfaction on 
the part of all involved. The participants developed a group identity where a 
connection is made between the women, and between the staff and the women, 
that is supportive, strengthening and affirming. The women felt special, 
learned about themselves and their baby, and felt empowered by the process. 
Nurses and resource personnel strongly supported the program for the benefits 
to patients--"every patient should have this kind of care"--and believed that 
the program provided an opportunity to practice nursing as they desired. The 
program also proved to be cost effective and time efficient for both the staff 
and for the mothers. This innovative health care program can improve prenatal 
care for childbearing women.

