What are the Barriers, Satisfaction, Prenatal Care Utilization and Birth 
Outcomes of Low Income Rural Pregnant Women?

Mildred A. Omar and Rachel Schiffman

Improving the outcome of pregnancy is a national priority. Rural areas with 
high concentrations of families in poverty often have limited access to health 
care with many pregnant women receiving less than adequate prenatal care. 
Researchers maintain that barriers and satisfaction have been linked to 
service usage and health outcomes of mother and infants. King's framework 
guided this study of the perceptions of pregnant women. The purpose was to: a) 
describe the barriers and satisfaction with prenatal care as perceived by 
rural low income women; b) describe the pattern of health care utilization of 
rural low income women; c) describe the relationship between the barriers, 
satisfaction with adequacy of prenatal care; and d) describe the relationships 
between barriers, adequacy, and maternal and infant outcomes. The Ten-Item 
Checklist, Patient Satisfaction with Prenatal Care instrument, Adequacy of 
Prenatal Care Index, Maternal Health Care Utilization Survey and medical 
record review were utilized. The convenience sample with consists of 60-75 
rural pregnant women receiving prenatal care from various providers. 
Descriptive statistics will be calculated. Associations between barriers, 
satisfaction, and adequacy of prenatal care and between barriers, adequacy and 
outcomes will be analyzed by analysis of variance. Preliminary findings 
indicate that travel and distance were perceived as barriers and that 
satisfaction was derived from a caring provider. Accessing care was perceived 
as both a barrier and an area of dissatisfaction. Implications for nursing 
practice include provision of prenatal care in county by Advanced Nurse 
Practitioners, redefining patterns of prenatal care, and coordination and 
collaboration with other providers to increase rural women's knowledge and 
access to prenatal care services.

