Determinants of Motivation in Regular Physical Exercise: A Test of the 
Wellness Motivation Nursing Theory in Older African Americans

Julie Fleury, Joanne Harrell, Carol Hogue, and Barbara Ainsworth

Numerous studies have demonstrated the benefit of habitual physical activity 
in unproving health, reducing the incidence of coronary heart disease, and 
increasing longevity and quality of life. Continued physical activity offers 
tangible benefits to physically capable older adults, primarily in reducing 
the risk of physical impairment and mortality. Understanding motivation to 
initiate and sustain health behavior change is an essential step in developing 
a lasting program of regular physical activity in those at highest risk for 
chronic illness. The purpose of this pilot study was to identify motivational 
predictors of the initiation and maintenance of regular physical activity in 
older Africna Americans. The study serves as a test of a motivation theory and 
provides a basis for understanding health issues and cultural preferences of 
minority persons at risk for chronic illness.

The pilot study had two phases. In phase I of the study, community-based focus 
groups were convened to determine the cultural meaning and relevance of 
motivational concepts as well as plans for subject recruitment and pilot study 
protocol. Sections from data collection instruments were reviewed to ensure 
readability, comprehension and relevance to intended participants. Based on 
the responses of the focus groups, standardized interview schedules and 
response formats were developed to facilitate data collection with a sample of 
elderly African Americans. In phase II of data collection, one hundred African 
American men and women over the age of 60 were recruited from Community Action 
programs in rural North Carolina. Subjects were recruited to evaluate 
motivational determinants of regular physical activity so as to provide a 
cross sectional evaluation of predictors of physical activity. Subjects 
completed an interview schedule at one point in time which included measures 
of cultural context, appraisal of readiness to initiate physical activity, 
self-regulation in the maintenance of physical activity, and patterns of 
physical activity. Both phases in the data collection were completed by May, 
1995.

This presentation will focus on describing which variables in a model of 
wellness motivation are significant predictors of regular physical activity in 
older African Americans. The goals are to augment knowledge of effective, 
feasible and acceptable strategies to maintain the cardiovascular health of 
older adults and prevent chronic illness through regular physical activity; 
and to lay the groundwork for further theory specification and testing.

