A Nursing Support Intervention with Mothers of Preterm Infants

Diane Holditch-Davis, Margaret S. Miles, Anne Fishel, Harriet Boone, Charlotte 
Gilbert-Evans, and Lloyd Edwards

Premature infants are at risk for later chronic health and developmental 
problems. Effective health and early intervention programs are available, but 
mothers of prematures do not consistently use these services because of 
unresolved issues from their infants' NICU stay and family problems. The 
purpose of this pilot study is to examine the feasibility of an intervention 
providing support to these mothers after hospital discharge. This intervention 
is designed to supplement existing well-child and developmental services by 
providing parental support that is usually not part of these services. Four 
specific research questions will be addressed: 1) the feasibility of the 
intervention, 2) the effect of the intervention on the use of services, 
maternal psychological wellbeing, and quality of the social environment, 3) 
the effect of the intervention on issues from the NICU, and 4) the specific 
activities performed at each contact.

Forty mothers and their high-risk premature infants will be recruited shortly 
before discharge and followed until the infants are 6 months post-term. The 
mothers will be randomly assigned to control and intervention groups. The 
intervention will consist of an initial in-person contact in the hospital 
followed by 2 home visits and 6 telephone contacts. Each contact will be 
guided by a sea-structured protocol and will be documented by the intervener 
using field notes. House's (1981) four types of support will be provided at 
each contact. Each subject's intervention contacts will be with a single 
intervention nurse. Services used will be measured using the Infant and Family 
Services Survey and an immunization record. Maternal psychological well-being 
will be measured using the Center for Epidemiological Studies Depression 
Scale, Stress Support Scale, and three measures of the mother's perception of 
the stress associated with parenting her infant. The quality of the infant's 
social environment will be measured using a 1-hour naturalistic observation of 
mother-infant interaction and the HOME Inventory.

This presentation will focus on describing the strategies we have used to 
analyse the feasibility of the intervention (research question 1) and the 
results of these feasibility analyses. In addition, preliminary analyses of 
the effectiveness using the first half of the sample will be presented.

