A Comparison of Cultural Competence and Cultural Confidence of Senior Nursing 
Students at a Private Southern University

Rick Zoucha and Rojann R. Alpers

The American Society is becoming increasingly diverse and multi-cultural. 
Nurses must recognize the impact this has on our profession, our educational 
preparation and our ability to provide quality care. Nursing education has 
recognized the need to incorporate in its programs courses which survey 
different cultures, teach cultural assessment, which assist students to 
explore and understand their feelings and value for cultural diversity.

The specific aim and purpose for this study was to compare the self reported 
cultural competence and cultural confidence of senior nursing students who had 
received class content on culture sensitive nursing with a senior class who 
had not received any cultural content. The stated hypothesis for this study 
is: Are there differences in self reported cultural competence and cultural 
confidence of senior nursing students who have received class content on 
culture sensitive nursing and those senior nursing students who have not 
received in class culture sensitive nursing?

The subjects in this study consisted of (N=32) senior nursing students who 
received class content on culture sensitive nursing and (N=31) senior nursing 
students who have not received class content on culture sensitive nursing. The 
Bernal and Froman Cultural Self-Efficacy Scale was used to measure cultural 
competence and confidence in this sample. The tool was administered to senior 
nursing students during one semester who have received cultural sensitive 
content and in another semester to senior nursing students who have not 
received cultural sensitive content in class. Data analysis included measures 
of central tendency and dispersion, and t-test of significance were utilized.

Findings suggest overall, students who have received some course content on 
culturally-sensitive nursing feel less competent and less confident to provide 
culturally sensitive care than those who received no course content on the 
subject. The integration of multi-culturalism into the nursing curriculum and 
the findings of this study will be presented and discussed.

Implications for this study include: enhanced cultural curriculum, continued 
faculty and student assessment of cultural competence and cultural confidence, 
and establishment of a culturally friendly practice and learning environment.

