Factors Affecting University-Based AIDS Education Efforts and Outcomes

Therese A. Boyd

Florida's state universities, in response to legislative mandates and concerns 
for college students, have launched a variety of AIDS education initiatives. 
However, the intended outcomes or changes in students' knowledge, attitudes, 
and sexual behavior is difficult to determine. This problem was addressed by 
investigating the efforts and outcomes of AIDS educational initiatives at a 
South Florida state university, while uncovering the factors that contribute 
to these outcomes.

A conceptual framework provided a visual model of factors that mediate the 
processes and/or outcomes experienced by the student in response to an AIDS 
educational effort. These factors are generally categorized as institutional 
mediators and individual mediators sharing subcategories of: people; 
circumstances; beliefs; and actions. Individual mediators also included 
endemic traits of the student. A qualitative methodology was adopted for 
flexibility and discovery of variables affecting efforts and outcomes. The 
study's five phase data collection process encompassed: 1) interviews with 
administrative and student leadership; 2) surveys of 804 undergraduate 
students; 3) in-depth interview with 22 students; 4) review of student 
interview transcripts by a panel of experts; and 5) extensive analyses of all 
data.

Findings indicated that students predominately receive AIDS information from 
impersonal mass media sources. In contrast to national studies, students at 
this University lacked proficiency (score of 80% correct or higher) in overall 
AIDS knowledge, particularly HIV prevention. Statistically significant 
relationships existed between level of knowledge, particularly HIV prevention. 
Statistically significant relationships existed between level of knowledge; 
condom use; and positive attitudes towards people with AIDS. Students wanted 
more information on HIV prevention, distributed by a variety of methods.

While this study found that students were becoming more knowledgeable, 
changing attitudes, and testing-out safer sexual behavior; it revealed a need 
for additional HIV prevention education, administrative support for 
programming, creative marketing strategies, varied methods for HIV prevention 
education, and promotion and support for sexual behavior change. The findings 
of this study are of particular importance to nursing students not only from a 
personal but a professional standpoint since nursing students are often 
queried by clients and peers about HIV/AIDS transmission and prevention. 
Specific recommendations include: garnering the support of academic 
leadership; utilizing effective marketing strategies; expanding the peer 
education program; and integrating HIV prevention messages throughout the core 
curriculum.

