Measuring Emotional Responses to Psychological Stress: Differentiation Between 
Instrument Unreliability and Changes in Emotional States

Laura A. Porter

Theoretical perspectives on psychological stress and coping emphasize that 
patients' negative emotional states are likely to fluctuate in response to 
cognitive appraisal and the effectiveness of coping strategies. Low 
correlations across time between the same measures of emotional state suggest 
that the coping process influenced emotion. However, if the instrument to 
assess emotional response is not reliable, low correlations may also occur and 
confound results. In contrast, high correlations across time between the same 
measures of emotional state suggest that emotional reponse is more stable and 
may reflect the influence of personality. Based on the zero-order Pearson 
Product Moment Correlations, Heise (1969) proposed a method for calculating 
both instrument reliability and construct stability which has important 
applications for coping research.

A secondary data analysis was conducted to illustrate how instrument 
reliability and stability of emotional responses could be differentiated in a 
sample of patients coping with percutaneous tranluminal coronary angioplasty 
(PTCA). Emotional response (measured with the "Unsure" subscale of the Profile 
of Mood States) was assessed 24 hours prior to the treatment (Time 1), at 
discharge from the hospital (Time 2) and 2 weeks following discharge (Time 3). 
The Heise procedure was conducted on the data of 47 patients who completed the 
measure at all three time points. The sample included 39 men and 8 women with 
a mean age of 62 years (SD 11). Results indicated that instrument reliability 
and construct stability could be differentiated. Instrument reliability was 
moderate at .625. Interestingly, construct stability coefficients across the 
three time points were as follows S12=.845, S23=.907, and S13=.766. These 
coefficients were relatively high, particularly from Time 2 to Time 3, 
suggesting that this emotion was stable across time and that personality may 
have had a greater influence on emotional response than situational variables. 
Thus the Heise method was useful in examining the emotional outcome during 
this stressful event.

