Fatigue and Anergy Levels of Women at 14 to 19 Months Postpartum Compared to 
Fatigue and Anergy Levels at 6 Weeks Postpartum

Nancy W. Troy

Fatigue can adversely effect the quality of the mother-child relationship, the 
marital relationship, and the woman's overall quality of life. It has been 
assumed that women recover from pregnancy and childbirth within six weeks. 
However, women have been found to be more tired at 6 weeks postpartum than 
healthy mena nd women who are not parenting (Troy, 1994). Studies examining 
women's experiences through 12 onths postpartum report fatigue to be one of 
their top three complaints. The purposes of this descriptive, correlational 
study were to: determine the difference in primiparous women's morning and 
evening fatigue and energy levels at 6 weeks postpartum and 14 to 19 months 
postpartum and the amount and quality of nighttime sleep, mood, return to 
functional status after childbirth, gratification in the mothering role, and 
social stress levels/life change events at 14 to 19 months postpartum. 
Participants from a previous postpartum fatigue study were telephoned and 
asked if they would consider participating in this current study. A total of 
27 women completed all of the self-report instruments. Preliminary analyses 
suggest that the women are more gfatigued and less energetic in the evening 
now and more energetic and less fatigued in the morning now than they were at 
6 weeks postpartum. The quality of sleep does not seem to correlate with the 
self-reports of fatigue and energy in either the morning or evening. The vast 
majority are working now with a mean of 35 hours worked per week (SD-10.5). 
They seem very gratified with their role as mother, but may be somewhat 
depressed in general. The women have made an almost complete return to 
funcational status after childbirth with selfcare and social/community 
activities slightly less complete than house work, infant care, and outside 
employment. They seem to be experiencing mild life crises of various sorts. 
The results of this study provide a better understanding of the 14 to 19 
months postpartum woman's quality of life (in terms of the variables measured) 
and a longitudinal comparison of fatigue and energy levels.

