Racial and Gender Differences in Quality of Life Prior to and Following Kidney 
Transplantation

Donna K. Hathaway, Cheryl Johnson, Rebecca P. Winsett, and Jean Milstead

Patients who undergo kidney transplantation can now anticipate about a 90% 
success rate for the procedure. Because transplantation is now so successful, 
people are becoming more concerned about how this procedure affects quality of 
life (QoL). Although several studies indicate (QoL) improves for kidney 
recipients, oftentimes information about the patients' pretransplant QoL in 
lacking and studies rarely consider other factors which may influence QoL such 
as race and gender. The aim of this study was, therefore, to ascertain if race 
or gender influenced QoL prior to or following transplantation by addressing 
the following research questions.

1. What are the racial and gender differences in QoL for patients before 
kidney transplant?

2. What are the racial and gender differences in QoL for patients at 6 and 12 
months after kidney transplantation?

The study included 90 patients without diabetes who underwent kidney 
transplanttation. Demographic characteristics of the sample are displayed 
below.

group      number  age    mos of    percent    percent with   percent
                         dialysis   employed   HS education   married
Afr.-Amer.   36    39.5    18.8       36.1        66.7          47.2
Caucasians   54    39.2    27.4       70.4        77.8          63.0
Men          63    41.8    23.3       55.6        71.4          55.6
Women        27    33.5    25.5       59.3        77.7          59.3

Five questionnaires were administered to all transplant patients at the time 
of transplantation, and at 6 and 12 months posttransplant. The questionnaires 
included demographic and health history information, the Sickness Impact 
Profile (SIP=functional ability), the QoL Index (QLI=health and well-being), 
the Adult Self-Image Scales (ASIS=psychoemotional), and the General QoL Scale 
(GenQoL=global).

Essentially all QoL scores showed some improvement for both racial and gender 
groups at 6 and 12 months after transplantation. The African-Americans did, 
however, report better scores than Caucasian recipients on most ASIS scales 
both before and after transplantation. However, because the Caucasian 
recipients had much lower pretransplant scores they were able to show greater 
improvment in the ASIS scales posttransplant. Similarly, 3 of 5 QLI scores 
were better for African-Americans before transplantation and again less 
improvement was seen for them posttransplant while the Caucasian recipients 
reported more improvement following transplantation. In contrast, SIP scores 
indicated African-American recipients had more compromised ability to function 
in every day tasks than did the Caucasian recipients both before and after 
transplantation. Gender differences in QoL outcomes were only manifested 
before transplantation for most of the scores that measured the ability to 
function in every day tasks. These differences disappeared, however, following 
transplantation.

The findings of this study demonstrate that kidney transplantation enhances 
the QoL of all transplant recipients regardless of race or gender. Racial 
influences are, however, present. While African-American recipients achieve 
less improvement in some of the affective dimensions of QoL, this is likely 
due to a "ceiling effect" evidenced by their high pretransplant scores and the 
resultant inability to improve scores beyond this high level following 
transplantation. In contrast, measures of QoL that reflect the ability to 
perform every day tasks of living are more compromised for African-Americans 
and also demonstrate less improvement following transplantation than they do 
for Caucasians.

