Concerns of Family Members of Bone Marrow Transplant Patients

Donna C. Owen, and Sharon D. Phipps

Families of persons undergoing bone marrow transplantation (BMT) need to 
contend with not only the issues associated with cancer but also a treatment 
protocol focused on complex frequent patient monitoring and a highly 
regimented technological environment. While an ever increasing body of 
knowledge has accrued about family members needs and concerns in the intensive 
care setting little is known about family member concerns during 
hospitalization for BMT. The purpose of this study was to identify concerns of 
family members of persons undergoing BMT during the acute hospitalization 
phase of initial transplant. The research question asked: What are the 
concerns expressed by family members of persons undergoing initial bone marrow 
transplantation?

The exploratory descriptive study took place on a 24 bed BMT unit in a 500 bed 
teaching hospital. Family members were asked to participate in focus groups 
about their concerns and the BMT hospitalization experience. Each focus group 
had between 4 and 6 members. Concerns of family members were elicited through 
the use of a semi-structured interview guide to facilitate focus group 
discussion. Family members were engaged in discussion for approximately 1.5 
hours. Interview probes were initially developed from the literature of family 
needs in the intensive care unit and the needs of parents of children with 
cancer. Examples of probing questions included: a) What do you need to help 
you manage or cope while your family member is in the hospital? b) What have 
you been concerned about most since your family member decided to have a bone 
marrow transplant? and c) What do you think is the best way for nurses to help 
you while your family member is in the hospital?

Audiotapes of each focus group were transcribed and a content analysis of the 
transcript was performed. The content analysis focused on identifying 
recurrent concerns and comparing identified concerns by BMT family members 
with concerns identified in published studies of family member concerns of 
critically ill patients. Concerns identified in the BMT group included: a) 
meaning of patient symptoms in relation to how well patient was responding to 
the transplant, b) truth-telling, c) keeping a positive attitude and being 
strong, d) control of information, e) receiving acknowledgement for their own 
needs, f) getting basic physical care needs met, g) being able to provide for 
the minute by minute physical care and comfort needs of the patient, and h) 
financial needs. Additional descriptive data and frequency of concerns will be 
reported.

Concerns identified family members of persons undergoing BMT are distinctly 
different from reported concerns of family members of persons hospitalized in 
intensive care units. Instrument development specifically addressing the 
concern of family members of BMT patients is needed. Qualitative studies that 
focus on gender and minority issues will provide greater insight into the 
needs and concerns of family members of persons undergoing BMT. Findings 
suggest that attention to issues of information dissemination in both content 
and timing needs to be carefully monitored in the clinical setting.

