Living With Chronic Illness: A Study of Gender Differences

Sharon W. Dowdy

The purpose of this qualitative study was to examine gender differences of 
persons with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in three specific areas: strategies to 
cope with pain, adjustment to a chronic illness, and social support. The study 
of gender differences in chronic illness is important because these are rarely 
examined and because chronic illness affects such a large percentage of the 
adult population.

Subjects for the present study are part of a large, federally-funded grant 
studying the behavioral aspects of rheumatoid artritis. Data collection for 
the large study (N=208) consists of mailed questionnaires, telephone 
interviews, and home visits. Data collection for this study is based on the 
second telephone interview for a subset of twenty subjects, ten men and ten 
women. All subjects were diagnosed by a rheumatologist with definite or 
classical RA within five years of the interview, and none have concurrent 
rheumatic disease or psychiatric disorder. Ages range from 39 to 76, with a 
mean age of 58.5. Fifteen are married, four are widowed, and one is single.

Fourteen open-ended questions in the telephone interview were analyzed using 
primarily the method of analytic induction. Interviews ranged from 30 minutes 
to 80 minutes, with a mean length of 50 minutes. Pain coping strategies and 
adjustment were similar for men and women, whereas some important differences 
were found in social support for men and women. Pain coping strategies were 
categorized as cognitive and physical, with men and women using similar 
percentages of each. Women, however, mentioned more strategies than men. Men 
slowed down or stopped the activity that was affecting the pain more often, 
while women wanted to actively do something to relieve the pain or just rest. 
Adjustment also showed similar patterns for men and women. Both learned to 
live with RA by searching for a person-environment fit. Either the environment 
was adjusted to the person (25% and 23% for women and men, respectively) or 
the person to the environment (75% and 77% for women and men, respectively). 
Men and women mentioned instrumental support equally as often, but women 
mentioned informational support three times as often as men. Emotioual support 
was importat for men and women, but they looked for their emotional support 
from different sources. Men depended on their spouse and family for emotional 
support, while women depended on friends and family. Both mentioned the 
negative aspects of social support.

In summary, men and women discuss similar patterns of coping with pain and 
adjusting to a chronic illness. Both men and women underscore the need for 
social support, but seek support in different amounts and from different 
sources. Studying patterns of adjustment, coping, and social support for men 
and women may help in developing differential interventions to help achieve 
positive health outcomes.

