Mothers' Views of Their Children's Growth

Elizabeth Reifsnider

The purpose of this study was to investigate the explanatory models of child 
growth and health held by mothers of children with growth failure. This study 
represents the second phase in an expansion of the investigator's dissertation 
research on the treatment of growth failure by community health nursing 
interventions. The interventions provided during the dissertation study were 
assoiated with a reduction in growth failure and an improvement in mother-
child interactions. The mothers were interviewed during the original study on 
their perceptions of their children's growth, health and size. The creation of 
explanatory models of child growth and health may allow us to understand the 
development of growth failure in children, and provide enhanced health 
services to those children at-risk of growth failure.

Specifically, the study explored the mothers' views of a healthy child, the 
impact of a child's diet on growth and health, and activities they identify 
that encourage the growth and health of their children. The research question 
was "What are the explanatory models of health and growth held by mothers of 
growth-delayed children?" An ethnographic design using intensive interviewing 
was employed. The sample consists of 39 mothers of growth-delayed children who 
were in the researcher's original study. The data analyzed consisted of 
semi-structured interviews conducted during the original research. A 
qualitative approach was used to provide a framework for the secondary 
analysis. Using ethnographic methods, the researcher inductively analyzed the 
themes and domains identified by the sample to create an explanatory model 
(Kleinman, 1980) of child growth for this population.

The interview guide used during the original study constitutes the instrument. 
The guide was utilized to identify the parent's perception of his/her child's 
growth and overall health. All interviews were tape-recorded. Qualitative data 
obtained from the original interviews was transcribed and analyzed using a 
code book developed by the researcher based on semantic domain, theme and 
pattern analysis (Spradley, 1979). Relevant demographic data and quantitative 
measures from the dissertation research was used to situate the study in a 
larger context.

The mothers of the growth-delayed children primarily identified genetics as 
the reason for their children's small size. This attribution persisted at the 
end of the study even though the mothers had seen their children grow at an 
accelerated rate during the intervention phase (four months). Mothers did not 
link their children's dietary intake with their size. The mothers wanted 
better environments for their children and identified poor neighborhoods and 
lack of safe play areas as impacting on their children's health. This research 
addresses the outcomes of child growth and health and focuses on the delivery 
of primary nursing care in the community and provides ideas for improving 
children's health and growth.

