Effect of Neurological Status on Interactions Between Mothers and Their 
Medically Fragile Infants

Esther M. Tesh and Diane Holditch-Davis

Due to improved medical and nursing care, more infants with significant and 
chronic medical problems are surviving. The effect of an infant who needs 
prolonged hospitalization and continuing care even after hospital discharge on 
parent-infant interactions is unknown. In addition, an infant's neurological 
problems further impairs interactive abilities. The purpose of this study was 
to explore the effect of neurological impairment on the interactions between 
mothers and their medically fragile infants.

Forty-one medically fragile infants and their mothers were observed 
interacting together for about 1 hour in the hospital on entry into the study 
at an average of 5.5 weeks after term (SD 8.1), every 1-2 months while in the 
hospital, 1 month after hospital discharge, and at 6 months corrected age. An 
average of 3.1 observations were conducted on each subject (range2-6). All 
infants had chronic life-threatening illnesses; most were technologically 
dependent. Medical diagnoses included multiple anomalies, CNS anomalies, 
intracranial bleeds, bronchopulmonary dysplasia, renal impairment, tracheal 
abnormalities, and prenatal substance exposure. Twenty-four infants were born 
prematurely; 25 infants were first born. At 6 months 19 subjects had abnormal 
or questionable neurological examinations and were considered neurologically 
impaired. The mothers had a mean age of 26.7 (range 17 to 41); 25 of them were 
married.

The observations were scheduled at a time when a feeding was expected. Four 
maternal caregiving activities, 9 mother behaviors, 3 infant sleep-wake 
states, and 5 hierarchical linear model, was calculated for each mother and 
infant variable using infant status, and location home or hospital as 
independent variables.

Fifteen variables changed significantly with age. Mothers fed older infants 
less, achieved more vis-a-vis, and had less body contact time with them. They 
also touched, held, rocked, looked at, and gestured to them less. Older 
infants were alert more of the time and had fewer large movements, startles, 
jitters, and coughs or sneezes. Only two variables showed a direct effect of 
neurological status: neurologically impaired infants together but not 
caregiving or playing with their infants over age; whereas mothers of 
neurologically impaired infants spent more time together at an early age in 
comparison with neurologically normal infants, but less time together at a 
later age. Impaired infants had much more jittering, but only at early ages, 
and showed negative facial expressions more of the time, but only at older 
ages. Observation location affected 5 variables. Mothers achieved more vis-a-
vis and moved their infants more, and the infants were asleep less, moved 
less, and vocalized more during observations in the home.

Thus, the neurological status of the infants has relatively small impact on 
the interactions of medically fragile infants and their mothers during the 
first year. The age of the infant affected many more maternal and infant 
behaviors than did neurological status. It may be the the behaviors of 
medically fragile infants differ so greatly from the behaviors typical of 
normal healthy infants or that the mothers are so concerned about the survival 
of the infant that neurological impairment has only minor additional effects 
on interactions. However, neurological impairment probably has a great effect 
in the second year of life as impaired infants fail to achieve the normal 
developmental milestones of walking and talking, and survival becomes more 
assured.

