Mothers in Prison: Maintaining Parental Role

Patricia J. Thompson and Nancy J. Harm

Specific Aims: The aims of this study were to better understand 1) the impact 
of incarceration on mothers and their children and 2) strategies that enhance 
parental role enactment during a mother's incarceration. As the 1990's began, 
the number of women in prison in the United States tripled to over 40,500. Two 
thirds of these are mothers of children under eighteen and 80% lived with them 
before prison. The prison environment has a negative impact on parenting. 
Mothers and children are separated, children must be cared for, and their 
mother's absence explained. Caretakers may not be able to care for the 
children appropriately, visits may be infrequent, and families must cope with 
related issues, such as substance abuse. A Parenting from Prison (PFP) program 
could help maintain the link between these mothers and their children. This 
research, based on a synthesis of symbolic interactionist role concepts, 
parental role components, and learning theory, measured the outcomes of teh 
PFP program for mothers in the Women's Unit at Tucker, Arkansas, and their 
children.

Research questions: 1. Is there a difference in parenting attitudes between 
incarcerated mothers who participate in the PFP program and those who do not, 
as indicated by post-intervention scores adjusted for pre-intervention status 
on the Adult Adolescent Parenting Inventory (AAPI) (Bavolek, 1989) and Index 
of Self Esteem (ISE) (Hudson, 1982)? 2. What is the status and experience of 
teh children of incarcerated women, as reported by the children and their 
caregivers?

Subjects: Question #1: PFP participants were 60 incarcerated adult mothers, 
selected into either an intervention group or a delayed intervention group. 
Question #2: Forty-eight children (ages 4 to 19 yrs) of 25 incarcerated 
mothers and their caregivers comprised the interview sample.

Methods: Question #1: Using a two-group repeated measures design, measures 
were administered to 60 women before and after the program of 15-weekly 
sessions of teh Nurturing Program for Parents (Bavolek & Comstock, 1985) and 
to a delayed intervention comparison group at those same times. Measures 
included semi-structured questionnaires, the AAPI, and the ISE. Data 
collection is complete. Group differences and interaction on the AAPI and ISE 
are currently being analyzed by a 2-way analysis of covariance (ANCOVA), using 
pretest scores as the covariate and intervention/no intervention and any type 
of abuse (drug, alcohol, emotional, physical, sexual) reported by mothers as 
factors. Question #2: Qualitative data collected through personal interviews 
with the caregivers and the children is undergoing content analysis using 
constant comparative techniques and calculation of frequencies.

Findings: Preliminary results indicate significant increases in pre-to-post 
scores on the AAPI and ISE and improved mother-child communication as a result 
of particiaption in the PFP program, as was found in previous studies. Most 
children's caregivers were their grandparents; the remainder were their 
fathers or other relatives. Caregivers and children described the children's 
school experiences, living situation, knowledge of mother's situation, 
response to separation from mother and siblings and to visiting the prison, 
and to perceived differences in mother-child relationships.

Implications: Parent education in the prison can help to maintain parent-child 
relationships. Children of incarcerated mothers and their caregivers have 
special needs for services to maintain physical and emotional health. Data 
from this study will be useful to nurses who provide teaching, counseling, 
emotional support, and referrals to mothers in or recently released from 
prison and/or to their family members.

