Benefits of a Coordinated System of Community-Based Health Care Services for 
Medically Underserved Children

Jill M. Hayes

Access to health promotional services for children in the United States (U.S.) 
has become an issue of critical importance. Fifty percent of the U.S. youth of 
today are at risk for drug and alcohol abuse, STD's, pregnancy, and injury or 
death from violence or accident. These health related risks often lead to an 
increase in school absenteeism and poor academic performance.

The purpose of this study was the measurement of the benefits of improved 
access to health care for Medicaid-eligible children. The academic and medical 
records of 143 children enrolled in an innovative program providing 
comprehensive health care services to Medicaid-eligible children were 
reviewed. Demographic data were analyzed to identify any significant 
characteristics of study participants. Data on utilization of health services, 
absenteeism, overall health status, and academic performance were analyzed to 
determine if this population would benefit from improved access to health-care 
services.

There was a significant increase in the use of wellness and illness services 
by participants. There was also a significant increase in the absenteeism rate 
of participants between Time 1 and 2, and Time 1 and 3. It was anticipated 
that absenteeism would decline as utilization increased. However, as 
participant utilization of services increased, absenteeism also increased.

It was anticipated that academic performance would improve as utilization of 
health care services increased. However, academic performance declined as 
utilization increased. Finally there was a significant change in the health 
status scores of participants between Time 2 and 3. In addition, any possible 
correlation between utilization of services and absenteeism, and utilization 
of services and academic performance, were explored.

Findings of this study represent significant changes in this population 
relative to the variables studied. Both utilization of services and health 
status improved following one year of enrollment in the Alliance. Absenteeism 
and academic performance declined for the same time period. Possible rationale 
for these findings and potential implications are discussed.

