Instrument Development: To Do or Not To Do

Sara H. Gueldner

The purpose of this paper is first to broadly discuss aspects of instrument 
development and second, to apply the different steps to an instrument on which 
I am currently working, the Index of Field Energy. The Index is a 17-item of 
well-being developed within the Rogerian Science of Unitary Human Being.

Four essential issues involved in instrument development will be presented. 
The first issue is determining the need for developing a new instrument as 
opposed to using or refining one that is already available. The second issue 
surrounds constructing a new scale and defining and analyzing the inherent 
concepts and subconcepts. Discussion on the use of experts and focus groups as 
ways to accomplish this will be included. The third issue concerns the 
psychometric properties important to the developing instrument. The number of 
items, item format, scale readability and clarity, scoring, length, and 
selecting appropriate tests for validity and reliability will be discussed. 
The fourth and last issue concerns piloting and revising the instrument.

The Index of Field Energy is a 17-item scale of well-being developed within 
the Rogerian Science of Unitary Human Beings. Initially, 75 potential items 
were generated. These were subsequently reviewed by a panel of nine Rogerian 
scholars to assure content validity; 40 items remained following this review. 
These eventually evolved into 17 items, each of which consists of a bipolar 
pair of pictures (i.e., a turtle at one end and a butterfly at the other) in a 
7 point Likert scale format.

The psychometric properties of the instrument were established through two 
sequential samples of 300 college students followed by 325 individuals of 
varying ages. The latter included 60 persons over the age of 65. The scale was 
designed both for people with limited formal education and for whom English is 
not the primary language. A game board format has recently been developed that 
allows hand placement instead of a paper and pencil response. This format is 
especially appropriate for children and older people. Test anxiety is reduced 
and people with limited mobility can respond.

