Accessing Instruments: Where Are They When You Need Them
MrtiN Rice and Carolyn C. Kee

The purpose of this presentation is to discuss methods of locating, accessing, 
and selecting instruments for use in a given study. Both formal and informal 
methods of locating instruments will be considered as well as how to access 
instruments including those with and without a copyright. Finally, selection 
criteria for judging the merit of an instrument in relation to a particular 
study will be discussed.

Locating Instruments: Formal methods for locating instruments to be discussed 
will include using computerized databases such as the Health and Psychological 
Instruments Online (HAPI). Information on compendia, books, and other 
resources will also be provided. More informal methods to be discussed will 
include networking, using proceeding manuals or conference brochures as 
information sources, and ways to locate researchers in a particular area.

Accessing Instruments: Methods of accessing information on copyrighted 
instruments include obtaining and using proof sets of scales as well as 
determining any restrictions on purchasing and using. Methods of accessing 
non-copyrighted instruments will also be considered.

Selecting Instruments: Once the instrument has been located, the suitability 
of the instrument for the study must be assessed. Important aspects include 
identifying the theory that undergirds the instrument, determining the fit 
with the investigator's conceptual definition, judging the appropriateness of 
the validation procedures used on the instrument in relation to the present 
study, and, similarly, the methods used for ascertaining reliability. 
Assessing the more mundane aspects of an instrument will also be discussed and 
include such concerns as length and appropriateness of format to study 
respondents.

Application: Brief discussions of the match between the concept of temperament 
in children and instruments designed to measure this concept will be presented 
as will the processes used in instrument selection for a study on medication 
use in older, dialysis patients.

