Refining Instruments Through Factor Analysis: But These Items Can't Go 
Together!

Lillian R. Eriksen

Purpose: This paper focuses on the use of factor analysis for the refinement 
of instruments. The process is illustrated by an example of the use of 
exploratory factor analysis (EFA) and confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) 
procedures. The use of EFA ad CFA approaches will be reviewed. The purpose of 
EFA to determine the linkage between observed variables and their latent or 
underlying factors will be illustrated. The use of CFA to test the hypothesis 
that specific links do in fact exist will be demonstrated.

Research Questions: 1. Is the initial conceptual framework for the development 
of an instrument to measure patient satisfaction with nursing care supported 
by the data from the first sample? 2. Is the factor structure, resulting from 
the first sample confirmed in a second sample?

Instrument: A 33 item, self-report, Likert type scale, to measure patient 
satisfaction with nursing care in the hospital was developed on framework 
consisting of 5 factors (Empathy, Dependability, Responsiveness, Information 
Giving, Tangibles).

Subiects: The first sample consisted of 230 patients from a women's hospital 
in Australia. The second sample consisted of 103 patients from two community 
hospitals in the Southwestern U.S.

Data Collection and Analyses: Questionnaires were distributed to patients the 
day of or the evening before discharge. They had been patients for at least 2 
days. Questionnaires were supplied with sealable envelopes for 
confidentiality. The EFA, using SPSS for Windows, was performed to examine the 
supposed factor structure. The process of using the SPSS output to refine the 
instrument structure will be presented. The CFA, on the second sample, was 
performed using structural equation modeling. EQS for Windows was used for the 
modeling. The process of using the EQS output will be presented.

Finding: The factor structure was not supported by the data from the first 
sample. The EFA provided information for refining the instrument. The 
structural equation modeling used for the CFA produced a respectable model fit 
which was refined with a respecification.

Implications: Both EFA and CFA provide powerful tools to support the 
refinement of instruments. EFA is a useful approach for identifying concepts 
underlying a larger number of variables. CFA, using structural equation 
modeling, can provide a test of the proposed specific relationship between a 
concept and the indicants of the concept. It is essential to keep in mind that 
all of this refinement is most dependent on the theoretical issues underlying 
any instrument. Factor analyses techniques are no substitute for thoughtful 
substantive consideration.

