Determing Scale Properties of Pictorial Scales: How Do You Get From Disney to 
Decimals?

Dorothy J. Stuppy

Background and significance: Determining a person's perception of the 
magnitude of subjective sensory stimuli such as dyspnea, fatigue, or pain 
represents a special challenge to clinical nurses and researchers. Ideal 
scales would be easy for people to use, be reliable and valid for measuring 
the concept of interest, and have properties of interval/ratio measurement. 
Few scales can meet all of these criteria. There is much debate about the 
level of measurement of Likert type scales and respondents must be able to 
understand and relate to the anchors used in the response scale. Visual analog 
scales possess mernc/ratio properties but may not be easily understood by 
young children, elders, or those from various cultural backgrounds. As a 
result, there is a need to develop and test alternative scaling models.

Use of a graphic scaling model using picture scales has been suggested for 
measuring the concept of pain. Most pictorial scales consist of a series of 
cartoon faces such as those developed in 1988 by Baker and Wong (6 faces), in 
1990 by Bieri, Reeve, Champion, Addicoat, and Ziegler (7 faces) and in 1985 by 
McGrath, deVeber, and Heam (9 faces) among others. The scales may also be a 
series of actual photographs of individuals expressing varying levels of pain 
(Beyer & Aradine, 1987). While these scales have been developed and tested 
mainly with children, there is a growing body of evidence that they may also 
be reliable and valid for self assessment of pain in adults. However, there is 
a question among researchers about the level of measurement represented by the 
pictorial scales. On the surface, these scales seem to represent a 
categorical-rank order level of measurement. However, researchers wishing to 
analyze data using parametric statistics are attempting to establish interval 
or ratio properties for the scales.

Purpose of presentation: This presentation will discuss strategies which are 
being used to determine if intervals between the faces on each of the various 
scales are equal or if the position of each face on a metric scale can be 
determined. Research examples of magnitude estimation, cross modal matching 
and variations on number/line estimation will be presented.

Data from a current study (data collection in progress) of adults from various 
cultures (African-American, Anglo, and Hispanic) will be presented. The 
purpose of the study is to establish scale properties, reliability, and 
validity of the Bieri and Aradine (1987) Faces Pain Scale (FPS) as it is used 
by lower income adults.

