Critical Thinking and Nursing Management: A New Approach

Eunice A. Bell

The rapid rate and constancy of change in today's health care environment 
requires nursing leaders with exceptional problem solving and decision making 
skills. Critical thinking skills of analysis, inference and evaluation are 
crucial. In particular, first line management requires constant use of 
critical thinking in areas of human and fiscal resource management. This study 
investigates the use of a new educational model to improve critical thinking 
skills of nurse managers. The project uses the research of Richard Paul and 
associates at the Center for Critical Thinking.

The research questions posited an increase in critical thinking skills and 
disposition upon completion of the six months educational project. The 
participants were 15 nurse managers in a 350 bed acute care hospital in the 
southeast. They included both sexes, ages from 30-52 years and educational 
levels from Diploma to MSN. The management experience ranged from 1-20 years. 
The measurement tools used both pre and post project were The California 
Critical Thinking Skills Test and Disposition Inventory. In addition, 
participant self assessment was used.

Findings included increases in total skills scores from 1-8 points. Increase 
in sub scores of analysis and inference were found while evaluation sub scores 
continued high. Increases in disposition toward critical thinking were found 
across the sample but were higher in those with higher skill scores. Of 
interest, participants with low pre project scores had larger increase in 
skills scores. Those with high beginning scores improved slightly or remained 
the same. Participant self assessment reflected strong agreement of learning 
about critical thinking and of use in the work and home setting.

This preliminary study of a new approach to critical thinking and nurse 
managers will be replicated by the researcher with additional like groups. The 
tools used for the first time with nurse managers should be tested further. 
Understanding the impact of good analysis and inference skills upon decision 
making leads to the suggestions that critical thinking be:

1. A major element of MSN education.

2. A major component of new nurse manager orientation.

3. Included in ongoing nurse manager education.

