Program Evaluation: The Employees' Perspective

Rebecca Krepper and Duke Rohe

Given today's economic pressures, health-care organizations are seeking ways 
to realize major gains in quality, productivity, efficiency and improve their 
competitive edge. St. Luke's Episcopal Hospital (SLEH), a 900 bed tertiary 
care facility, is in the process of implementing a patient care delivery model 
called "Team Care" as their answer to sustained, high quality, high value, 
patient-focused care. Evaluation research is one methodology available to 
assist in making decisions about the effectiveness and efficiency of existing 
programs. This quasi-experimental study was designed to collect data on the 
employees perceptions of their work environment prior to and during the 
transition to Team Care.

All health care workers who were assigned to one of the cardiovascular (CV) 
demonstration units were surveyed using the Work Environment Scale (WES) in 
1993, prior to implementation of Team Care. In 1994 all patient care staff 
from throughout the hospital were asked to complete the WES. This therefore 
allowed for pre- and post-test comparison of the CV units and comparison of 
the CV units with those areas just beginning implementation of Team Care. The 
sample consisted of staff who completed and returned the questionnaire; 
1993=75 (52% return) & 1994=548 (56% return).

The WES, developed by Moos in 1981, is comprised of ten subscales that assess 
three underlying dimensions: Relationship, Personal Growth, and System 
Maintenance and System Change. Descriptive statistics were calculated for each 
of the deoographic variables and means were determined for each of the ten 
subscales on the WES. Where appropriate oneway anovas, correlations and 
t-tests were completed in order to identify significant (a=.05) relationships 
or differences.

In comparing the CV units before and after implementation of Team Care it was 
found that the workers surveyed in 1994 differed significantly frcm 1993 in 
Supervisors Support (u'94=5.3 vs u'93=6.02); Control (u'94=5.59, down from 
6.36 in '93); and Work Pressure (u'94=5.75 up from a low of 4.91 in `93). 
These results were understandable because the restructuring involved a 
decrease in the absolute number of middle managers. With the accompanying 
shared leadership philosophy, workers are encouraged to be more independent. 
Work Pressure was above the tool mean for all areas in 1994 perhaps due to 
factors not connected with Team Care.

In 1994 the CV area was significantly different from one or more of the other 
4 services in regard to their perception of Involvement (u=6.15), Supervisor 
Support (u=5.3), Peer Cohesion (u=5.38) and Autonomy (u=6.35). The first 3 
variables are all subscales of the relationship dimension. These scales assess 
the extent to which employees are concerned about and committed to their jobs 
and the extent to which employees are friendly to and supportive of one 
another. The last subscale, Autonomy, represents the extent to which employees 
are encouraged to be self-sufficient and to make their own decisions. All of 
these characteristics are reported in the literature to be outcomes of a 
patient focused approach to care delivery.

The value of benchmarking prior to initiating change cannot be overstated. The 
WES provided a snapshot of where the staff was in regard to the 10 subscales. 
This will be invaluable when assessing the impact of Team Care in the years to 
come.

