A Study of the Relationship of Job Satisfaction with the Organizational 
Variables of Structure, Technology, and Environment in Public Health Nursing

The purpose of this study was to use an exploratory design to examine the 
relationship of the organizational variables of structure, technology, and 
environment with job satisfaction in public health nurses in South Carolina. 
Methodology involved the distribution of a five-part Questionnaire Packet to 
all licensed nursing personnel in the South Carolina Department of Health and 
Environmental Control (SC DHEC). Each packet contained a letter of 
introduction and five tools for data collection - Structure Instrument 
(Alexader, 1986), Technology Instrument (Leatt & Schneck, 1981), Environment 
Instrument (Leifer, 1975), McCloskey-Mueller Job Satisfaction Scale (MMSS) 
(McCloskey-Mueller, 1990) and Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) (Herman, 1990). Two 
months were allowed for collection of data.  Packets were received from 845 
personnel for a response rate of 50.6% with the final study sample consisting 
of 838 nursing personnel representing all 13 health districts and SC DHEC 
Central Office.

Data aalysis included descriptive analysis of the demographic characteristics 
of the study group, and differences in research variables by classification, 
education, work status, program assignment, years in nursing, and years at 
DHEC. Analysis of variace was done to determine the significance of 
differences between groups by demographic variables. Instrument results were 
analyzed with multiple regression techniques to identify relationships among 
the research variable. Stepwise regression was used to deterinine the 
subset(s) of research and demographic variables that best explained the 
variace in job satisfaction. Correlational approaches were used in exaiming 
the relationships among demographic and research variables. Comparative 
techniques of factor analysis and coefficient of congruence were used in 
examining the performance of these instruments in this population with 
previous research. Difference score analysis was used to explore the fit if 
the three dimensions of structure, three dimensions of technology, and 
environmental uncertainty. Seven relational statements were tested through 
regression analysis and t-test of quartile rankings.

Organizational structure was the critical variable in predictIng job 
satisfaction in public health nurses in SC DHEC. Structure accounted for 41% 
of the variance in job satisfaction on the MMSS and 26% on the VAS. Structure 
remained the critical predictor in the difference score analysis. Two of the 
seven relational statements were supported. Technology and environment assumed 
significance only in concert with each other or structure. This study has 
implications for nurse administrators in public health to create more flexible 
work environments with active involvement of staff for increased job 
satisfaction.

