Maintaining Quality of Worklife for Practicing Nurses During Organizational 
Transitions

Sally Knox

Reorganization, restructuring and reengineering are common occurrences in 
health care institutions as health care reform calls for dramatic changes in 
the way health care is delivered in America's hospitals and other care 
delivery organizations. The focus of this study was to identify administrative 
and management behaviors of the Chief Nurse Executive, perceived as most 
supportive and helpful to practicing nurses during a time of organizational 
change and transition. The specific transition underway at the time of the 
study was the change from a functional practice model to a patient-centered 
model of modular nursing.

The research question considered in the study is: What 
administrative/management behaviors are most valued by practicing nurses 
during a transition in practice model? The areas of administrative/management 
assessed were:

1. High visibility of administrators/managers in practice areas during 
transitional period.
2. Education of staff in relation to the change.
3. Verbalized commttment to quality care during the transition by 
administrative/management staff.
4. Verbalized commitment to the welfare of staff during the transition by 
administrative/management staff
5. Support for the problem solving of staff by administrative/management 
individuals.
6. Communication of plans regarding the transition and future progress.
7. The authority of staff for their aspect of the change.
8. Follow-up with staff regarding their suggestions and questions during time 
of the change.
9. Opportunities to clarify issues in a non-threatening environment during 
transition.
10. Rewards and recognition of staff for success in performance during the 
transition.
11. Provision of tools and resources needed during the transition.

The study included sixty five staff nurses practicing in the patient care 
areas where the change from functional nursing to the patient-focused modular 
model occurred. The perceptions of the nurses regarding the transition 
behaviors were assessed and ranked in order of importance at the mid term 
point of the transition.

All of the participants were registered nurses. The nurses were provided a 
list of the administrative/management behaviors and were asked to rank order 
them in relation to their perceived value during the transition.

The findings of the study indicated that the most valued 
administrative/management behaviors during a time of transition are:

1. Communication of plans regarding the transition and future progress.
2. Verbalized commitment to quality care by administrative/management staff 
during the transition.
3. High visibility of administrators/managers during the transition period.

The quality of work life is difficult to maintain during transitions. Nursing 
staff in the clinical practice areas often have need for support and 
information from administration and management during times of transition. The 
behaviors perceived as supportive and helpful by staff may differ from those 
intended as supportive and helpful by administration/management during 
transitions. Transitions can be facilitated for staff by the delivery of 
valued behaviors by administration and management. If behaviors are not valued 
or perceived as supportive, the intention of providing assistance to 
registered nurses during the process of transition will not be actualized.

