Understanding Chronic Dysfunction in the Aged Using a Disability Model: 
Urinary Incontinence as an Exemplar

Susan M. Sherman and Carol C. Hogue

Identifying theoretical frameworks that guide nursing research and inform 
education and practice is vital for nursing to participate in shaping health 
care delivery for the future. In addition, an appreciation of the complexity 
of the many dimensions of chronic disease and dysfunction suggests the need 
for an underlying framework that can adequately guide research and infuse our 
research findings with meaning. This presentation focuses on the exploration 
of a disability framework for use in studying urinary incontinence (UI).

The concept of disability is not new. The growth in interest in rehabilitation 
and development of functional testing which occurred during the 1940's and 
1950's are forethoughts of current models, though dramatically transformed. In 
the realm of conceptual development, however, disability and some of its 
related terminology and concepts have taken on diverse meanings. These 
meanings will be explored in the context of several disability models (World 
Health Organization, International Classification of Impairments, Disabilities 
and Handicaps [1980] and Nagi [1991]). A current, enhanced model fo disability 
(Verbrugge and Jette, 1994) will be presented and discussed. Strengths and 
weaknesses of the model for nursing research will be explored.

Qualities of UI make it ideal for testing the adequacy and usefulness of teh 
disability framework for nursing. UI is a chronic, nonfatal condition 
affecting approximately 35% of community dwelling elders (Diokno, Brock, Brown 
and Herzog, 1986). Most rate symptoms as mild. However, as time progresses, 
certain factors can decelerate or accelerate the processes which eventually 
define or accentuate the disabling aspects of UI for the individual. A 
presentation of UI as a disablement process will be reviewed as well as 
enhancements to the model which feature secondary conditions and dysfunctions 
that frequently accompany UI.

