Self-Reported Health and Physical Performance Status of Older Adults with 
Arthritis: Implications for Measurement of Disability

Carol C. Hogue and Sharon M. Cullinan

Introduction: Over 30 million Americans report having arthritis, a generic 
term for many diseases characterized by inflammation and joint involvement. 
Prevalence increases with age; by 60, 49% of the population report arthritis. 
Prevalence continues to increase with age after 60. Disablement is the effect 
chronic conditions have on the functioning of specific body systems, and 
people's abilities to perform expected roles in society. While not fatal, 
osteoarthritis (OA), the most prevalent form of musculoskeletal disease, is 
the most common cause of disability in older adults. Persons with OA have 
reduced functional performance and aerobic power: they often limit their 
activity because of pain. Until recently, treatment patterns restricted 
activity. Levels of activity interact with disease effects, and both are 
superimposed upon the declines of normal aging. In nursing research on older 
adults at risk for disablement, investigators are faced with the choice of 
measures of physical function: self-reported evidence or observation of actual 
performance, or both. In this study, both methods were used, and this paper 
reports the relationship between the two methods in a sample of older adults 
with OA of the hip or knee.

Methods: Sixty-seven ambulatory but sedentary older adults (mean age 72) who 
reside in the community in a rural southeastern county were studied. Subjects 
were 58% white, 88% female, had 9.6 years of education, had no severe 
cognitive impairment, and had 2.8 chronic conditions. The Sickeness Impact 
Profile (SIP), physical dimension, was the self-reported measure of physical 
health. Performance measures included the 6-minute walk, integrated test of 
spine, hip, and knee flexion and extension, functional reach, and timed 
eighteen-foot walmk with and without a 10# bag of groceries. Covariates 
included age, number of chronic conditions, cognitive performance, arthritis 
pain, education, race, gender, and the psychosocial dimension of the SIP. 
Multiple regression analyses were conducted after investigating distributions 
and multicollinearity.

Results: Five performance measures explained 52% of the variance in self-
reported physical health: getting up from the floor, function reach, 18-foot 
walk, 6-minute walk, and ascending stairs. Neither age in years, race, gender, 
number of chronic condition, education, nor cognitive performance moderated 
that relationship, but when categorical age (younger or older than 75), 
arthritis pain, and the psychosocial dimension of the SIP were included as 
covariates, 72% of the variance was explained. Especially in adults over 75, 
the presence of pain, and social and emotional factors strenthen the 
relationship between self-reported physical health and observed physical 
performance.

