Measurement Characteristics of Disability-Related Constructs in Chronically 
Institutionalized Nursing Home Residents

Eleanor S. McConnell and Carol C. Hogue

Nursing home residents suffer from high levels of dependency in self-care, yet 
little is known about factors that may be precursors to worsening dependency. 
Disablement models suggest the present of potentially manipulable variables 
intervening between disease and disability that may be fruitful points for 
intervention. Before these models can be fully utilized, adequacy of 
measurement of disability and related factors in the population of interest 
must be established. The purpose of this study was to assess the test 
characteristics of measures of disability and related constructs proposed in 
the based measures originally developed and tested in populations other than 
nursing home residents were examined. Research questions were: (1) What is the 
inter-rater, test-retest, and internal consistency reliability of standardized 
measures of cognitive performance, strength, range of motion, functional 
limitation, and disability? and (2) Does each measure perform in nursing home 
residents in a manner consistent with that reported in other populations? 
Inclusion criteria were: (1) Over age 60, (2) stands with assistance, (3) 
follows simple commands, (4) permanent resident of nursing home, (5) not 
terminally ill or medically unstable, (6) resident or proxy informed consent 
obtained. Sixteen permanent residents over age 60 from one nursing home 
participated in the reliability testing. Data from an additional 49 subjects 
representing two nursing home sites were used to assess the factor structure 
of each measure. Reliability was assessed using intra-class correlation 
coefficients (ICCs). Coefficient alpha was calculated as a measure of internal 
consistency. Exploratory factor analysis using a principal axis factoring 
technique was used to explore the dimensionality of each measure. Measures 
obtained included hand-held dynamometry, goniometry, the Neurobehavioral 
Cognitive Screening Examination (NCSE), the 7-item Physical Performance Test 
(PPT), and the Functional Independence Measure (FIM). Subjects' functional and 
cognitive status were similar to nursing home patients nationally, but were 
more likely to be male (67%), were slightly younger (mean age 76.7, SD=9.13). 
Findings: All measures had excellent test-retest and inter-rater relability, 
except two items on the NCSE. Test-retest concordance at one week varied by 
measure and ranged from ICC=.83 to .91 for range of motion and strength 
measures, ICC=.32 to .91 for the NCSE, ICC=.80 for teh PPT, and ICC=.71 to .89 
for teh FIM. Inter-rater reliabilities for all measures ranged from ICC=.80 to 
.99. Internal consistency of teh NCSE, PPT and FIM was high. Factor structures 
for each measure were consistent with other measurement work reported on these 
instruments, except for the NCSE, literature was observed. Implications: Many 
existing measures of disability and related constructs can be sued reliably in 
selected nursing home residents. Unresolved issues in using these measures in 
nursing hom residents include establishing their relationship to self-reported 
and proxy-reported function, and structuring measurement protocols to minimize 
respondent burden and missing data.

