An Examination of Coping Strategies and Self-Care Practices of Elderly African 
American Women with a Chronic Health Problem

Sarah V. Myers

Statement of the Problem: A major methodological issue in research with 
minority populations is whether particular instruments are culturally 
sensitive. The use of instruments which are not culturally sensitive may 
result in inconclusive findings.

Specific Aims: The specific aims of this pilot study were: (1) To determine 
the reliability and validity of the Jalowiec Coping Scale and the Denyes 
Self-Care Practice Instrument in a population of elderly African American 
Women, and (2) To describe the coping strategies and self-care practices of 
elderly African American women with a chronic health problem.

Research Questions: The following research questions were formulated to guide 
this study: 1. Is the Jalowiec Coping Tool and the Denyes Self-Care Practice 
Instrument reliable and valid in a sample of elderly African American women? 
2. What are the coping strategies and self-care practices of elderly African 
American women with a chronic health problem?

Methods: The study design was a descriptive exploratory design. A sample of 65 
women were recruited for this study. Three instruments were used to collect 
data: the Jalowiec Coping Scale, the Denyes Self-care Practice Instrument and 
a researcher developed questionnaire.

Results: Data were analyzed using mean scores for use and effectiveness of 
coping strategies. The internal consistency of the Jalowiec Coping Scale and 
the Denyes Self-Care Practice Instrument was evaluated. Cronbach alphas of .72 
were obtained for the Jalowiec Coping Scale and .73 for the Denyes Self-care 
Practice Instrument when used with elderly African American women.

Conclusion: Findings from this study have facilitated an understanding of some 
of the methodological issues which must be addressed in conducting research 
with minority populations, coping strategies and self-care practices were also 
assessed. This data will be useful to other investigators who are interested 
in conducting research with minority populations.

