The Context of Caregiving in Frail African-American Elderly Dyads

David L. Kahn and Yvonne Eaves

This presentation reports on part of the findings of a study of the 
experiences of caregiving in frail African-American elders living in dyadic 
relationships. The specific aims of this ethnographic study included a thick 
description of these experiences from the perspective of the elders, as well 
as a description of the influence of contextual elements, such as ethnicity 
and history of loss, on these experiences.

The methods of data collection in the study included ethnographic interviews 
with 14 pairs of African-American elders of which at least one of the elders 
required regular caregiving activity. These interviews were conducted over 
several sessions by the C.I., an African-American women. Data were also 
collected through participant observation by the P.I., a non-African-American 
man. Participant observation involved the formation of relationships over a 
two year period between the P.I. and two additional dyads. Participant 
observation data included multiple informal interviews and participation with 
these elders in important social and community events.

Data for analysis included transcripts of the ethnographic interviews and 
extensive field notes inscribed by the P.I. These data were analyzed using a 
traditional hermeneutic approach. This approach included careful and multiple 
readings of the data texts, identification of exemplars that captured 
important aspects of informants' experiences, sorting and coding of exemplars 
into categories, and arranging categories into themes that were representative 
of the data as a whole. The themes were used to produce a narrative 
description of the informants' experiences in relation to the specific aims of 
the study.

One interesting theme in the findings was the seamlessness or transparency of 
the experience of caregiving for those elders who were taking care of the 
other. In contrast to the vast literature about caregiver burden, primarily 
derived from research on middle class European-Americans, these elders did not 
talk about burdens of caregiving as part of their everyday life. Instead, 
caregiving was taken for granted, was something that they had been doing for 
others most of their lives, and was not a new, unusual, or particulariy 
important or salient experience.

This theme will be discussed in detail in this presentation and illustrated 
with examples of data. In addition, several themes from the data that 
contextualize this finding and explain its meaning from the perspective of the 
informants will be presented. These contextual themes include the notion of a 
separation between the responsibility for caregiving and the actual provision 
of such care, a history of negative experiences with health care providers and 
other aspects of the health care system, and cultural expectations of kin and 
community members. Implications for further research and clinical practice 
will be discussed.

