Cognition, Depression, Function, and Behavior Outcomes Among Urban Elders 
Receiving a Multidisciplinary Team Intervention

Jane B. Neese

Providing health care for the graying population of America has become a 
national concern. In 1990, 12.6% of the U.S. population was 65 years and 
older, with the fastest growing age group being 85 years and older. Among 
those aged 85 years and older, more than 80% have at least one chronic health 
condition and many have several. The rising proportion of frail elderly at 
risk for chronic diseases creates a growing epidemic of chronic mental and 
physical disabling conditions. For nursing and the delivery of health care, 
the implications of this aging population is dramatic. How do we provide 
effective health care to the elderly who have complex physical and 
psychological problems within the context of decreasing health care dollars? 
In developing innovative service delivery models, what are the patient 
outcomes of services rendered?

This ongoing pilot study focuses on determining the similarities and 
differences in cognition, function, depression, and behavior characteristics 
between impoverished urban elders residing in public housing who received 
multidisciplinary team health services and those elders who do not receive 
similar services. The multidisciplinary team comprises two nurses, one nurse 
specializing in geriatric health and the other nurse specializing in 
psychiatric and mental health nursing, and one social worker. This study is a 
cross-sectional study with a static-group comparison design. A 
randomly-selected sample of 25 urban elders age 60 years and older living in 
public housing who receive a multidisciplinary team interventions were 
compared to randomly-selected sample of 25 urban elders living in public 
housing who do not receive the same services. The independent variables 
consist of sociodemographic factors (age, race, religious affiliation, gender, 
martial status, household composition, annual income and educational level) 
and health status factors (nutritional status, cognitive status, depression, 
activities of daily living, instrumental activities of daily living, mobility, 
vision, behavior, and hearing). The dependent variable will be whether or not 
the individual uses the multidisciplinary team. Descriptive statistics and X2 
will be calculated to determine the differences in cognition, depression, 
function, and behavior of the urban elders using the multidisciplinary team 
intervention and those elders not receiving any formal service intervention. 
Nursing implications will be discussed in depth in the presentation.

