Home Care Following Hospitalization of Elderly Rural Patients with Chronic 
Diseases: Evaluation of Changes in Perceived Health Status on Fluctuations in 
Utilization and Cost of Formal and Informal Services

Marcella J. Griggs

Policy efforts to control costs mean that an appropriate balance between 
formal and informal caregiving systems must be created, but few studies have 
examined the costs associated with caring for chronically-ill older adults in 
their homes. Research questions addressed: 1) whether Global Health Status and 
Functional Health Status values change over the course of an illness episode 
for both patients and in-home primary caregivers; 2) whether Burden of Care 
values change for caregivers during the course of an illness episode; and, 3) 
whether Formal and Informal Service Utilization and Cost Distributions differ 
between groups of patients who get better and those who get worse during the 
course of an illness episode.

A comparative prospective panel design was used to interview a sample of 21 
chronically-ill patients and their 21 primary caregivers on admission to a 
Medicare-certified home health care agency, at termination of skilled 
services, and 30 days after discharge. Health status measures included the 
Sickness Impact Profile, ADLs, IADLs, and Burden of Care. Formal services and 
costs were evaluated using visits made and charges billed to Medicare and/or 
Medicaid. Informal services and costs were evaluated using hours of assistance 
provided with ADLs and IADLs and regional hourly wage rates. The data were 
analyzed using within-subjects repeated measures ANOVAs.

Health status of patients changed significantly across time, with patients who 
got better showing improved health status but continued difficulty with ADLs 
and IADLs. Burden of Care did not change statistically over time. Formal 
service costs were higher for patients who got worse compared to those who got 
better. Patients received 4.4 mean hours of informal services per day. 
Intensity of informal services was greater during initial home care services; 
however, intensity remained the same and did not change for those who got 
worse. The average cost per patient day was $47 for formal services and $44 
for informal services. This study revealed a highly impaired patient group 
with dedicated informal caregivers spending an average of 31 hours each week 
helping with ADLs and IADLs in addition to the visits made by formal service 
providers. The findings from this study have importance for public policy and 
clinical practice with regard to forging realistic linkages between both the 
formal and informal support systems as patients move from one provider system 
to the next.

