Monitoring Fever Patterns and Hydration in Hospitalized PLWA

Donna H. Taliaferro

Little has been documented about the patterns and non-specific responses 
associated with fever in persons living with AIDS (PLWA). These 
cytokine-modulated effects often generate "hectic" febrile courses, with 
precipitous rises and declines within short spans of time. In order to 
quantify relationships between febrile symptoms, it is necessary to make 
contact with the subject at the onset of temperature rise and collect data 
throughout the episode. To study the effects of fever on hydration in PLWA, an 
assessment of pre-existing water loss must occur prior to the onset of a 
particular febrile event. Identifying the start and finish of a febrile 
episode has been problematic, using routine temperature-taking schedules. 
Waiting for unit personnel to notify the study team results in observations 
that begin mid-episode, or during fever defervescence.

Specific Aims: In a NINR/NIH funded study of febrile symptom management, pilot 
work was done to determine 1) the extent to which the temperatures taken 
routinely on the hospital AIDS unit captured temperature elevations during an 
8 hour shift; 2) patterns and frequency of fever elevations in PLWA 
inpatients; 3) changes in hydration following febrile episodes; and 4) 
relationships between hydration and severity of temperature elevations during 
fever.

Methods: Subjects (n=35) were enrolled on admission to the HIV/AIDS unit of a 
southwestern university-based hospital. Daily rounds were made by 
investigators and oral temperatures recorded from routine once-a-shift 
measurements on patient charts. Temperatures were taken mid-shift by the study 
team. If readings were over 37 degress C, temperatures were repeated at 15 
minute intervals until the direction of rise or fall was determined. If 
temperatures continued climbing, the patient was monitored continuously 
throughout the febrile episode. Baseline weights were obtained. Hydration was 
assessed on admission by physical exam of skin and tissue turgor, eyeball 
resistance, and moisture of tongue and mucous membranes. Weight and hydration 
was assessed 12 hours post febrile episode.

Findings and Implications: Routine once-a-shift measurement of body 
temperatures fail to capture significant numbers of febrile episodes. To 
detect episodes of fever at the onset, close vigilance is necessary at the 
first sign of temperature rise.  Hydration is influenced by many factors in 
PLWA, other than fever. Febrile patterns are hectic and intermittent in 
nature, often accompanied by profuse sweating.

