Monitoring Febrile Shivering in PLWA: Methodological Approaches

Barbara J. Holtzclaw

Fever is a nearly universal symptom of the many opportunistic infections 
experienced by persons living with AIDS (PLWA). Regardless of the offending 
organism, a complex of hypermetabolism, energy expenditure, dehydration, and 
desiccation often follows. Shivering plays a major role in generating elevated 
body tempwature. When opportunistic infection occurs, release of endogenous 
pyrogen (EP) from host cells is triggered by interleukins and other cytokines, 
which are elevated in PLWA despite declining T-lymphocytes. EP resets the 
hypothalamic thermoregulatory set-point to a new level, higher than the 
patients existing temperature. Chilling ensures and warming responses are 
initiated. Shivering generates heat, while vasoconstriction serves to conserve 
it. The measurement of shivering onset and severity has been a significant 
part of this investigator's program of research, yet the monitoring of this 
variable has inherent difficulties. In an ongoing study of febrile symptom 
management in PLWA, specific methodological approaches were taken to quantify, 
validate, and prepare data collectors in the measurement of shivering.

Specific Aims: Piloting of the measurement was designed to: 1) quantify 
shivering on an ordinal scale with objective indicators for each level, 2) use 
a physiological indicator to verify the onset of shivering; 3) test data 
collectors for inter-rater reliability in shivering observations; 4) identify 
any problems in shivering detection and monitoring that would complicate the 
study.

Methods: Using data from previous studies of febrile shivering in 
immunosuppressed patients, a protocol was developed. An ordinal shivering 
scale was refined from 5 previous studies of shivering. Electromyographic 
(EMG) signals from the masseters were monitored continuously during febrile 
episodes to detect the earliest non-visible masseter contractions (stage 1), 
increasing stages (2 through 4) were observable by progressive cephalad-to-
caudal muscle involvement. Data collectors were trained in shivering 
observation in two settings: 1) with an actor simulating shivering at various 
stages; 2) with actual patients shivering in postoperative or febrile 
situations.

Findings and implications: Progressive stages of muscle involvement provide 
the most consistent unit of measuring shivering in the clinical setting. 
Surface EMG offers limited means of shivering quantification because of: 1) 
variations from one muscle to another; 2) electrical interference from the 
environment; and 3) artifact from nonshivering muscle movement. However, the 
pattern and bursts of masseter contractions in the 100 to 500 microvolt range 
serves as a reliable and objective indicator of shivering onset.

