Cultural and Ethnic Aspects of Home Fever Management in PLWA

Beverly H. Robinson

Opportunistic infections with fever commonly complicate the condition of 
persons living with Acquired lmmunodeficiency Syndrome (PLWA). Despite 
immunosuppression, PLWA are known to experience severe febrile responses. 
Nurses in community settings are often challenged by the balance of 
traditional Western medical therapies and cultural and/or ethnic customs and 
practices. These approaches may coexist peacefully, augmenting one another, or 
be in therapeutic opposition. Therefore, the nature of both the febrile course 
and the prevailing modes of home treatment are of crucial importance to the 
health care provider.

Specific Aims: Almost no data exist about how fever/fever management is viewed 
among ethnic/minority populations. Therefore, this study was designed to 
provide information about 1) the meaning of fever, 2) use of folk/traditional 
medicine for fever care, 3) beliefs about causes of fever and 4) the 
perception of successful fever treatment.

Methods: The unit of sampling was the family of subjects (n=35) who were PLWA 
enrolled in a comprehensive study of febrile symptom management. Subjects, 
caregivers and significant others included Hispanic, African American and 
Anglo men and women. Open-ended interviews that encouraged PLWA and their 
caregivers to disclose treatment methods were used to obtain pertinent 
information about folk methods for fever management at home. This naturalistic 
data of verbatim responses provide text for content analysis, as described by 
Krippendorff, of fever management practices. Culturally-based practices of the 
patient and caregivers must be understood and acknowledged as having value 
before decisions about intervention strategies for fever management can be 
appropriately and successfully implemented.

Findings: While no inferences can be drawn from these qualitative data, the 
symbolic importance of the tradition, the context in which the meaning or 
belief is held, and the influence these beliefs play on the person's practice 
of fever care holds important cues to assessment and interventions of PLWA in 
home settings. Some beliefs are religious in origin, others are superstitions, 
still others seem based in tradition, rather than any known contingencies.

Implications: The person's perception of disease and treatment also influence 
their perceptions of symptoms. The nurse caregiver must work in concert with 
the person/family's belief system to keep the patient actively engaged in 
effective symptom management. The fact that fevers are often self-limiting may 
add to the family's perception that folk remedies are effective.

