A Phenomenological Study of Homeless Children's Perceptions of Homelessness

Sandra Zehnder, Ptlene Minick, and Myra C. Carmon

For a multitude of reasons, there are an increasing number of families with 
children who are now homeless. In the past research has been done with adults 
and very little with children. The studies that have been done on children 
have been done from the guardian's or researchers perspective. While this 
research does provide useful information, the perception of the children who 
are homeless is missing. The purpose of this study is to describe what it is 
like to be homeless from the school-age child's perspective.

It was thought that these children were unable to know how they felt and 
therefore were unable to relate and describe their experiences and needs.

The phenomenological research approach investigates the lived experience of 
the individual. Data was gathered through group interviews. In-depth 
audiotaped group interviews were conducted with six children who are homeless 
for six meetings for a total of 36 interviews. This research team used 
thematic analysis to identify prominent themes from the audiotaped interviews.

After Institutional Review Board approval and consent for the study had been 
obtained from the administrative staff at the day care center, mothers and 
children were identified by the day care staff of potential participants. As 
participants were recruited, the technique of snow-balling was used to recruit 
other volunteers.

In this study it was found that living in a shelter has positive aspects while 
at the same time difficult for the school-age child and hindering their 
psychosocial development. There was a strong need for approval and their 
greatest fear was that their peers would discover that they were living in a 
shelter and ridicule them.

Children are knowers and are able to relate and describe their experiences and 
needs. With the incidence of homelessness of children increasing, it is 
important for nurses and other health-care workers to listen to the children 
and be cognizant of their needs and accept them for their achievements to gain 
cooperation in their care. Through understanding their experiences as they 
perceive them, we as health-care providers are in a better position to meet 
their needs.

