The Relationship Between Self-Care Agency, Self-Care, and Health in the 
Pregnant Adolescent

Dee Stonebraker

Adolescence is a developmental period during which social and cognitive skills 
for decision making and responsible self-care are developed. However, despite 
concerns about personal health, adolescents do not behave in ways congruent 
with these expressed concerns. While a theoretical link has been established 
between Orem's concepts of self-care agency, self-care and health in adults. 
These relationships have not been thoroughly studied in the adolescent 
population. Therefere the purpose of this descriptive study is to determine 
the relationship between basic conditioning factors, self-care agency, 
self-care and health in pregnant adolescents, 12-19 years old.

Prenatal adolescent clinics at two research sites were used to select 100 
adolescents by convenience nonprobability sampling. The typical subject was 
black (50%), single (78.8%), attending school (60.6%) and in the 10th grade 
(28.6%).

Instruments included a Demographic Data Sheet and the Denyes' Self-Care 
Agency, Self-Care Practice, and Health Status. Data analysis included 
descriptive, correlational and stepwise multiple regression.

No significant correlations were found between selected basic conditioning 
factors (e.g. age, siblings, birth order, marital status and ethnicity) and 
self -care. A significant correlation was found between self-care agency and 
self-care (r=.7648, p<.001) as well as self-care and health (r=.7650, p<.001). 
Results of a multiple regression analysis revealed that two subscales of 
self-care agency (ego strength and health decision-making capability; and 
attention to health) accounted for 59% of the variance of self-care. Together 
self-care agency and self-care accounted for 61% of the variance of health.

The responsibility of nurses and adolescents is to appreciate and strengthen 
beneficial self-care practices, encourage the replacement of inappropriate 
ones and foster self-care with accessible professional care. Adolescents 
should be given a variety of opportunities to strengthen their decision-making 
capabilities and ego strength.

