Adolescents and the Taks of Pregnancy

Michele H. Salisbury

Background: Rub in described four tasks of pregnancy that accompany prenatal 
role attainment in the adult pregnant woman; however, she doubted the ability 
of adolescents to engage in these tasks and thereby attain the maternal role 
particularly in the prenatal period. Three tasks occur before the birth of the 
baby: seeking safe passage, ensuring acceptance by significant others and 
binding in to the child. The study will use a qualitative approach and Rubin's 
tasks of pregnancy to explore the adolescent's engagement in the tasks of 
pregnancy and thereby their progress toward attainment of the maternal role.

Method: Thirty-two adolescents between the ages of 13 and 18 in the third 
trimester of pregnancy were recruited and interviewed at a public health 
department. The mean age was 17.1; 27 were white and 5 were Black. 
Twenty-three were primigravidas, and 3 were having their third baby. After 
birth of the baby, the researcher did a chart review to ascertain outcome 
pregnancy data: birthweight, maternal weight gain and number of prenatal 
visits.

Results: Seeking safe passage: 19 of the 32 adolescents sought prenatal care 
in the first trimester of pregnancy. Furthermore, the adolescents stated they 
had changed behaviors to help safeguard their own health and that of their 
unborn baby. Ensuring acceptance by significant others: initial fear of 
negative reactions of family members to the pregnancy is a barrier to seeking 
safe passage, nevertheless, by the end of the pregnancy, all adolescents had 
negotiated support for themselves -- 14 with their mothers but others with 
sisters, aunts or other family members. Binding in to the unborn child: these 
adolescents extended the search for safe passage to the remainder of the 
pregnancy. The mean number of prenatal visits for the participants was 12.4; 
they gained a mean weight of 35 pounds and their babies had a mean weight of 
3388 grams: all parameters that are at the upper end of normal limits.

Discussion: This study provides evidence that adolescents engage in the tasks 
of pregnancy. Rubin's apprehension that adolescents would be unable to 
complete the tasks of pregnancy and therefore be unable to progress toward 
attainment of the maternal role is unfounded for this sample. Nevertheless, it 
does suggest that for adolescents, the task of ensuring acceptance by 
significant others assumes heightened importance because it seems that safe 
passage cannot be undertaken until the adolescent negotiates at least some 
rudimentary acceptance. Nurses working in prenatal clinics or family planning 
clinics where pregnancy tests are done need to be aware of the possibility of 
this occurrence and be able to counsel the adolescent about strategies to use 
with their families.

