Critical Pathways: Effectiveness in Achieving Patient Outcomes

Carol L. Ireson

While nurses are expected to develop written care plans on all hospitalized 
patients, there are few studies of the relationship of this process to patient 
outcomes. The purpose of this research was to examine the effect of 
structuring the evaluation of subgoals, inherent in the critical pathway 
process, on outcomes achieved by patients with total hip or knee replacements. 
A critical pathway is a structured patient care plan that provides optimal 
sequencing and timing of interventions for a particular diagnosis or 
procedure, and the expected patient responses to those interventions.

The framework for this study was a conceptualization of the link between 
process and outcome in evaluating quality of care. The hypothesis was that 
patients whose care is planned and evaluated using a critical pathway will 
achieve better clinical outcomes; including greater self-care ability, 
ambulation, and lower psychological distress; a shorter hospital stay; and 
lower hospital charges than patients having care planned and evaluated 
according to the standard procedure.

The experimental group included 64 subjects recruited from the orthopedic unit 
at a 450-bed community hospital for comparison with data from a control group 
of 64 subjects recruited from the same site. A repeated measures, pre-test, 
post-test, quasi-experimental design was used. Data from the experimental 
group were collected on the first post-operative day and one day prior to 
discharge from the hospital as were the data from the control group. Post 
discharge data on the same patient outcomes were collected from a random 
sample from the experimental and control groups. Data analysis included 
bivariate analyses of group for similarities in sex, age, type of procedure, 
and mutivariate analyses of each patient outcome variable.

Those participants with a critical pathway achieved better quality outcomes on 
the first post-operative evening and at discharge than did those with the 
traditional care planning process. The critical pathway group also experienced 
a shorter hospitalization. The charges for the critical pathway group were not 
significantly lower. The results of this study may provide valuable 
information regarding the design of the process for planning, evaluating, and 
documenting patient care, and directions for structuring the care planning and 
documentation process in on-line nursing information systems.

