Development of the Nursing Management Diagnosis Ineffective Change Management

Ruby Shaw Morrison

Diagnosing the problems of nursing organizational units is essential to 
effective management decision making, just as diagnosing actual or potential 
health problems is essential for planning effective nursing care. Nursing 
management diagnosis is a judgment about nursing organizational problems that 
provides a basis for nurse manager interventions to achieve outcomes for which 
the nurse manager is accountable. A nursing organizational problem is a 
discrepancy between what should be happening and what is actually happening 
that prevents the goals of nursing from being accomplished in the 
organization. In a previous study 72 nursing management diagnoses were 
identified from problems and judgments described by nurse managers. 
Subsequently, these diagnoses were validated and prioritized. The nursing 
management diagnosis "ineffective change management" was validated by 97.8% of 
the 136 nurse managers participants. A priority score, calculated from the 
frequency of occurrence and level of disruption associated with the diagnosis, 
indicated that ineffective change management was a very high priority with a 
score of 7.837 on a scale of 1 to 10.

The purpose of this study was to develop the definition, defining 
characteristics and interventions for the nursing management diagnosis 
"ineffective change management". Focus group discussions were conducted with 
two  groups of nurse managers (n=17) to identify etiologies, defining 
characteristics, and interventions for the diagnosis. Literature review and 
analysis of interviews resulted in defining ineffective change management as 
the state in which activities that are designed to improve individuals, 
groups, or organizations were unsuccessful in meeting goals, were inefficient 
in use of resources and/or resulted in dissatisfaction.

Etiologies of ineffective change management included lack of Iong range 
vision, poor communication, failure to include persons responsible for 
implementing change in the planning of change, failure to evaluate change in 
progress and make adjustments as needed, unclear expectations, incorrect 
assessment and diagnosis of organization and the impact of change, inadequate 
time to plan for change, and too many changes concurrently. Defining 
characteristics include organizational issues (such as decreased productivity, 
negative public image, decreased cost effectiveness, and disorganization), 
personal issues of staff and managers (such as increased stress, decreased 
morale and job satisfaction, self doubt, and frustration), and consumer issues 
(such as dissatisfaction with service and mistrust). Interventions focused on 
reversing the etiologies, primarily communicate clearly, involve others in all 
phases of the change process, and provide the support needed to implement 
change. Nurse manager responsibilities for implementing change effectively 
could be enhanced by using the findings from this study.

