Quality Nursing Care in the Hospital Versus the Home A Question of "Locus" of 
Control

Mary R. Lynn

While the provision of optimum care to patients is cleariy a professional 
obligation of nurses, it is considerably less clear how quality care should be 
evaluated, or who should be involved in the evaluation. From the premise that 
the provider and the recipient Of care are essential evaluators of the quality 
of nursing care, a series of studies have been conducted to elicit the 
perspectives of these partners in the care exchange. This paper will address a 
comparison of these perspectives when nursing care is delivered in a hospital 
setting versus the increasingly common home setting.

All studies were based on the same method: qualitative interviews of patients 
and registered nurses were conducted to determine their perceptions and 
definitions of quality nursing care. Using the grounded theory method, a 
single grand-tour question (How do you describe or define good nursing care?) 
was posed, followed up by intensive questioning designed to determine the full 
extent of the informant's possible responses and illustrations. Interviews 
were audio-taped and literally transcribed. Constant comparative analysis 
formed the basis for the generation of categories of responses as well as more 
general concepts from the data.

In the hospital-based studies a total of 20 registered nurses and 20 patients 
on medical-surgical units were interviewed. Conceptual categories from the 
interviews included themes related to the concept of caring (e.g., getting to 
know the patient, being mindful, nurturance) and to vigilance (e.g., 
responsiveness) emerged. In the home health study a total of 16 people were 
interviewed - 9 patients and 7 nurses. The patients had been in home health 
care for an average of 17 months, had a variety of medical and surgical 
diagnoses, and were primarily cared for by a family member in their home. The 
central process in this study, negotiated care, refers to the understanding 
that, unlike the hospital, the patient shares the responsibility with the 
nurse for the care exchange.

Negotiated care differs markedly from the quality care process in the acute 
care setting in that, while the nurse in the acute care setting is largely in 
control, the nurse in the home setting is a genuine partner in the care 
exchange. She/he may be looked to for the same attentive behavior the acute 
care nurse is expected to display, but she/he is no longer in the catbird 
seat. In the home health setting the nurse is the "guest" and while she has 
the "authority" in the care exchange, the patient and family become empowered 
by their familiar surroundings or their ability to "not do" if they so choose. 
Therefore, in contrast to the hospital based nurse's control over the care 
exchange, it is incumbent upon the home health nurse to help the patient 
decide what care regimen is for them and how they will enact it.

As nursing care moves from the hospital to the home setting it is essential 
that nurses understand the shift in control over the care exchange from the 
provider to a negotiation between the provider and recipient of care.

