Cognitive Status in Medically Hosptialized Patients: Nursing Documentation vs. 
Standardized Assessment

Elaine Souder

Purpose: Although nursing literature discusses the importance of assessing 
mental status, little research has addressed nurses' observations of cognitive 
impairment, or the concordance of nurses' detection of cognitive status and 
standardized assessment. The purpose of this study was to examine patient 
charts for nursing documentation of impaired cognitive functioning and compare 
nursing notations with information gained by standardized measurement.

Subjects: The sample consisted of 42 patients ranging in age from 35-74 years 
(M= 51.9; SD=10.1) hospitalized on a general medical unit at a university 
medical center. Inclusion criteria included English-speaking adults receiving 
medical treatment. Patients who had evidence of altered consciousness, i.e., 
confusion, dementia, organic brain syndrome, depression, or mental retardation 
noted on the physician's admission note were excluded from study. Additional 
exclusion criteria included administration of narcotics within past 24 hours, 
illiteracy, inability to speak, or difficulty in hearing.

Methods: A prospective descriptive design was utilized for this study. Data 
were collected by two research assistants. After the first RA determined 
eligibility, obtained informed consent, and reviewed nursing records, a second 
RA who was a licensed psychological test examiner blinded to chart 
information, administered the following standardized assessments: Clock 
Drawing Test, Neurobehavioral Cognitive State Examination (NCSE), Standardized 
Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), and WAIS Block Design Scale. Data were 
analyzed and summarized using SPSS software.

Findings: A review of nurses' notes and flow sheets revealed no documentation 
of impaired cognitive status on the 42 subjects. In fact, each record examined 
had at least several notations, "alert and oriented x3", but no further 
information on cognitive status was found.

The Clock Drawing Test, a simple cognitive screening measure, revealed 
impairment in 24% of the subjects. Similarly, 54% of the sample had 
significant deficits on one or more sub-scales of the NCSE. The mean MMSE 
score was 27 (total 30); however, 21% scored 24 or below indicating impaired 
mental status. On the Block Design, 34% received a scaled score of 6 or below 
indicating performance two standard deviations below the reference age group.

Interestingly, there was no significant age difference in 20 subjects with 
impairments in two or more tests (M=53.1, SD=9.9) compared to 22 subjects with 
normal cognitive performance (M=50.8, SD=10.5), p=.47.

Implications: The absence of nursing documentation of cognitive impairment in 
the presence of performance deficits on standardized measures may reflect lack 
of attention to this parameter of functioning or inability to detect cognitive 
impairment using informal clinical observation skills. These findings suggest 
that nurses should not assume intact cognitive status when gathering patient 
data and teaching patients complex medication and treatment regimes. This is 
especially important in an era of shorter hospitalizations characterized by 
sicker patients. A simple cognitive screening measure, such as the Clock 
Drawing Test, would help to identify impaired cognitive status when present.

