Bending the Tenets of Experimental Design to Achieve Cultural Compatibility

Merle H. Mishel

As nursing moves to intervention research, the profession must address the 
design and implementation of interventions for the underserved and not solely 
attend to the easy to access and available typical Caucasian middle class 
subject. In this symposium we will present efforts to address the needs of 
underserved and understudied minority populations and discuss the threats 
these efforts raise concerning principles of traditional experimental design. 
Two intervention trials, Management of Uncertainty in Prostate Cancer 
(RO1NR/CA03782-03) and Management of Uncertainty in Older Women with Breast 
Cancer (RO1CA57764-03) are being conducted to examine the racial/ethnic 
differences in the efficacy of a 10 week telephone delivered 
psycho-educational intervention for reducing uncertainty, enhancing self-care, 
improving psycho-social adjustment, reducing emotional distress and improving 
quality of life. The study populations include women over 50 with breast 
cancer newly diagnosed at any stage who are undergoing treatment and men with 
stage B or C prostate cancer who are recovering from surgery or undergoing 
radiation. The goal for composition of both studies is equal numbers of 
African-American and Caucasian subjects.

In the design of studies to address the underserved, the investigative team 
must confront some of the traditional rules for experimental design. Issues in 
revision of instruments for compatibility with local dialects and cultural 
orientation include the global versus specific construct validity of concepts 
under study, use of multiple indicators for assessing concepts, and approaches 
for assessing specificity of measures when modified for a specific population.

Areas that are often poorly elaborated in intervention research become 
priority areas when working with the underserved. The importance of attention 
to recruitment and retention will be discussed from the position of removing 
sources of error using Lipsey's work on design sensitivity. The importance of 
involving multiple stake holders in the recruitment of subjects will be 
discussed from the perspective of balancing a community involvement 
orientation with the notion of controlling for sources of error. Similarly 
retention efforts are more elaborate when samples are not those traditionally 
involved in research. Traditional experimental design has to be balanced with 
a naturalistic paradigm that allows for the relationship between investigator 
and subject. The integration of a naturalistic perspective into the retention 
effort for a clinical trial is a new notion to be presented.

Determining the integrity of an intervention that flows and undulates as new 
information about the underserved sample is learned requires a view of 
intervention as evolving and not static. The threat that this causes to 
traditional views of experimental design will be discussed integrating 
principles form naturalistic methodologies.

