Issues in Revising Research Instruments for Use With Southern and African-
American Populations

Lorna Harris, Merle H. Mishel, Barbara B. Germino, and Sheron Sumner

This presentation will focus on the concerns explored in adapting instruments 
used for data collection in a study to test a psycho-educational intervention 
for Southern men and women receiving treatment for cancer. The nursing 
literature in recent years has given increasing attention to the production of 
research that is both culturally sensitive and scientifically sound. Striving 
to develop research that meet both goals has proven to be a challenge because 
those individuals conducting the research have most often been socialized into 
a Western middle-class perspective and have received limited orientation to 
perspectives of other cultures.

Culturally sensitive research implies that the perspectives of the study 
population are reflected in shaping all aspects of the research, including 
instrumentation. Issues that must be considered include an awareness of 
regional and ethnic group differences in the use of language and its 
implication on the revision of instruments, the use of instruments to acquire 
information about the cultural values and norms of the study population and 
determining whether instruments are able to convey, in culturally meaningful 
terms, the intent of the instrument.

The Southern culture has an English based language that is permeated with 
phraseology that reflects the influence of all the various peoples who have 
populated the region. Because of the rural and isolated nature of many 
Southern communities, those within communities are believed to have more 
similarities in language and perspectives regardless of ethnic background, 
especially among the poor. African-Americans in the region have also been 
found to have their own dialects. These issues paired with the low literacy 
rate in the South require careful examination of instruments for 
understandability by the research subjects and close attention to the 
sometimes subtle changes needed in revising the wording of instruments. A 
description of how this was accomplished in the study will be given.

Another important issue concerns cultural similarities and disparities between 
the researchers and the study population and how to bridge the gap in cultural 
knowledge for the researchers. Instruments can be used to provide information 
about the norms, beliefs and values of a population, but these scales may not 
give additional insight into the research outcomes. Information about specific 
regional populations is limited in the nursing literature or given in such 
general terms that the researchers find it of little use in understanding the 
nuances of the culture. Instruments used for this purpose will be identified 
and their usefulness discussed.

The last issue to be examined is how to identify whether concepts and their 
measures are culturally meaningful to the population being studied. This is an 
important area because values and priorities often differ between cultures. If 
cultural meaningfulness is not determined, instruments may represent concepts 
and perspectives that are foreign to the culture under investigation or 
completely omit concepts that are important to the culture of research 
subjects.

