Recruitment of Minority Subjects for Nursing Research

Barbara B. Germino, Merle H. Mishel, Lorna Harris, and Sheron Sumner

Minorities are often poorly represented in health research (Graham, 1992). 
Trials of behavioral interventions to promote coping with cancer are notorious 
for their lack of representative samples. The purpose of this paper is to 
describe three levels of strategies evolved to enhance the recruitment of 
African-American men and women as subjects in two nursing intervention 
studies: planning, design and implementation strategies.

In planning the trials, problems recruiting minority subjects, in particular 
rural and elderly minority subjects, were anticipated. A minority 
co-investigator was an active member of the team from the initial preparation 
of proposals for funding. Literature on minority recruitment was critically 
reviewed and the few suggested strategies were considered. Other investigators 
in the state who had been or were in the process of studying African-Americans 
were consulted for suggestions. Strategies planned in the design phase 
included selection of sites that maximized numbers of potential minority 
subjects; use of multiple sites; matching of recruiter/data collectors to 
subjects by gender and race; matching of nurses delivering the telephone 
intervention to subjects by gender and race; adaptation of study instruments 
to a population with high levels of semi- literacy and illiteracy as well as 
to colloquialisms common in the region among the populations to be studied. 
Once the study was implemented and the first six months of data collection had 
been completed, it was evident that, in spite of these strategies, a number of 
additional barriers to inclusion of minority subjects existed and there were 
at least two distinct kinds of recruitment problems. For elderly women with 
breast cancer, in spite of increasing the number of sites with the largest 
populations, the numbers of older African-American women being diagnosed with 
breast cancer were much smaller than anticipated. Once identified, these women 
were generally willing to participate in the study; refusal rates were very 
low. For African-American men with prostate cancer, the numbers anticipated 
were available but the refusal rate for participation reached 50%. Barriers 
which became evident as the study progressed included lack of adequate and 
accurate information about breast and prostate cancer in the African-American 
community, especially among elderly African-Americans; longstanding distrust 
of the health care system and suspicion about participation in research 
studies; lack of economic or other perceived benefits of participating in 
research. While some of these problems were mentioned in the literature and by 
other investigators, the extent and intensity of the barriers was not clear 
until the study was underway. Using knowledge of these barriers and their 
roots in cultural belief systems, additional strategies have been developed to 
enhance minority recruitment. Hiring of community workers who are respected 
and visible members of the communities in which recruitment is ongoing builds 
on existing relationships and provides a bridge between African-Americans and 
the university based study. Specific strategies designed to enhance community 
awareness of breast and prostate cancer, provide participation incentives and 
enhance visibility will be discussed.

