Interventions Sensitive to Regional and Cultural Issues

Merle H. Mishel, Barbara B. Germino, Lorna Harris, and Sheron Sumner

The purpose of this paper is to describe the culturally specific issues that 
emerged when a nursing intervention for breast and prostate cancer patients 
was delivered to a sammple who differed both regionally and culturally from 
those on whom the intervention was previously tested. The intervention is 
being delivered to rural southerners both Caucasian and African-American men 
with prostate cancer and women with breast cancer with special attention to 
older individuals. Whereas the original testing of the intervention had been 
with primarily a middle aged Caucasian middle class sample of breast cancer 
patients located in the Southwest, the intervention has been modified for 
applicability to a different population.

The importance of testing an intervention on a variety of patients is to 
determine the generalizability of the program, the robustness of the 
intervention strategies across culture, social class and race and the cultural 
compatibility of the intervention.

Although the testing of interventions on non-whites is considered important, 
African-Americans and low income individuals are present in less then 10% of 
the studies on psycho-social interventions for cancer (Anderson, 1992). The 
number of studies that include a sufficient number of African-Americans to 
analyze by race has declined in the last 20 years (Graham, 1992). Such a trend 
indicates that psycho-education interventions may move into nursing practice 
with insufficient study for their applicability to the range of patients 
seeking care.

In the planning stage of the current intervention studies, modification of the 
intervention required identifying the components that were not culturally or 
regionally compatible. Specific attention was given to identifying cultural 
beliefs about cancer and cancer treatments. The specific strategies used to 
achieve culture compatibility will be discussed.

In the intervention phase of the study, it was evident that attempts at 
achieving cultural relevance were incomplete. Additional issues emerged which 
included the interplay of religious beliefs and acceptance of medical care, 
the impact of financial restrictions on ability to manage side effects of 
treatment by physicians among African-American and Caucasian patients, 
limitations in social resources, cultural beliefs about managing symptoms, 
cultural norms about discussing sexual dysfunction and alternative expressions 
of intimacy, cultural norms about accepting help and discussing topics such as 
incontinence. These topics and others that emerged in the delivery of the 
intervention will be discussed in the paper.

New interventions had to be developed and prior strategies had to be modified 
to address the culturally specific topics that emerged. These strategies will 
be presented such as the use of faith and religion as a source of support, 
gradual introduction of suggestions for expressing sexual intimacy, resources 
for handling employment discrimination and others.

