Innovative Approaches to Retention of Minority Subjects

Sheron Sumner, Merle H. Mishel, Barbara B. Germino, Lorna Harris

This paper will address the methods being utilized to enhance retention in two 
nursing intervention studies with older men with prostate cancer and women 
with breast cancer. The two studies are very similar in ethnic distribution of 
the sample, inclduing an equal number of European-American and Afrianc-
American subjects, and in the design protocol and intervention. All subjects 
are enrolled in the studies for nine months with data collection occurring at 
recruitment into the study, four months later and three months following the 
second data collection. Since subjects are in the study for nine months, 
maintaining their interest and willingness to participate in data collection 
and receive the intervention is a primary concern. Older persons are less 
familiar with psycho-educational research and older African-Americans may be 
less trustful of the research endeavor. In order to retain such persons in the 
investigation several retention approaches have been devised and tested. 
Although it is early in the investigation, subjects report that they enjoy 
receiving the retention incentives and view them as caring and thoughtful 
gestures from the research staff.

In the paper the incentives provided for subjecs in each study will be 
discussed. The incentives chosen differ from payment of subjects for 
particiaption but are selected to be attractive to a wide range of 
individuals. Incentive and retntion gifts are selected for cultrual and gender 
compatibility of research subjects, with speical attention to the needs of an 
underserved population. Since older persons may have restrictions on their 
activities and social contacts, we have developed a retention program that 
communicates warmth, caring and attention to the subject as an individual 
person.

Retention materials are organized into four categories. Letters or printed 
materials, gifts, seasonal incentives, and alternative interventions. 
Retention efforts are tracked for each subject through a d-based program that 
includes information on retention efforts as time marks. Time marks include 
data collection dates generated by the program from the first data collection 
entry, monthyly letters and incentives sent, birthday, anniversay and other 
speical occasion dates along with a place for entering seasonal incentives. 
Specific attention is given to community and nationwide efforts such as breast 
cancer or prostate cancer screening months and cancer survivors day during 
which materials relevant to the community or national agenda concerning cancer 
are given to all participants in each study. Ethnic holidays are also 
acknowledged in retention mailings.

Presentation of our retention program will be organized around displaying a 
typical retention program for a subject in the breast cancer intervention 
study and a retention program for patients and their family member in the 
prostate cancer study. Resources used to obtain incentives will be shared with 
the audience as will the computer program established for tracking retention 
activities.
