The Influence of Psychosocial Factors on Women's Adjustment to Diabetes

Deborah F. Willoughby

Successful adjustment to a chronic illness such as diabetes mellitus is 
influenced by a variety of psychosocial as well as physiological factors. The 
primary purpose of this study was to examine the extent to which social 
support, personal resources, coping styles, metabolic control, and 
psychosocial adjustment to illness differed among women with diabetes living 
in different kinds of household structure. A second purpose was to explore the 
influence of social support, personal resources, coping styles, and household 
structure on the psychosocial adjustment and metabolic control of women with 
diabetes. Roy's theory of adaptation provided the theoretical framework for 
the study.

The sample included 115 women whose mean age was 48 years and who had diabetes 
for an average of 10 years. The instruments consisted of a demographic data 
form, a measure of social support, a personal resource scale, the Jalowiec 
Coping Scale, the Psychosocial Adjustment to Illness Scale, and self-report 
items for assessing metabolic control and household structure. Multiple 
analysis of variance showed that women living in different types of household 
structures differed in both personal resources and coping skills and that 
women with different levels of metabolic control differed in both personal 
resources and psychosocial adjustment to illness. Higher levels of social 
support were significantly correlated with better personal resources, more 
effective coping skills and better psychosocial adjustment to illness. The use 
of evasive and emotive coping styles was associated with more problems in 
psychosocial adjustment to illness. Discriminant analysis indicated that 
social support, personal resources, household structure, coping skills, and 
psychosocial adjustmet to illness were poor predictors of metabolic control. 
Multiple regression showed that 51% of the variance in psychosical adjustment 
to illness was explained by personal resources, social support, and metabolic 
control.

Findings indicate that household structure, social support, personal 
resources, and coping skills are important factors in the adjustment of women 
to the demands of chronic illness. This knowledge will be sueful for nurses in 
assessing patients and planning interventions. Further research is needed to 
test nursing interventions designed to enhance social support and coping 
skills.

