Assessing Physical Activity and Body Size Values of Minority Women

Kelly Mayo

The population of African-American women is more sedentary than any other US 
group (Schoenborn, 1986). In South Carolina, 71% of African-American women are 
sedentary and they are 1.1 times more likely to be obese than their non-
sedentary counterparts (Wheeler, Muneta, Jones & Lane, 1993). However, data 
collection measures used to establish the physical activity of populations 
focus primarilyn on sport an dexercise and may not be appropriate for groups 
who do not participate in these activities. Furthermore, such instruments do 
not consider factors that may impinge upon physical activity. One such factor 
is values about body size. Previous research has found that African-American 
women of lower social status are heavier, view themselves as heavier, and 
perceive attractive body size as heavier than black women of higher social 
status and white women regardless of social status (Allan, Mayo, Michel, 
1993). These findings suggest that physical activity may be related to 
culturally based differences in body size values. New valid and reliable 
measures for assessing physical activity need to be found to address 
ethnically diverse groups in the US.

The specific purposes of this study were to: a) pilot test an instrument 
designed to assess physical activity and b) to establish the relationship 
between the physical activity practices, body size values, and selected socio-
demographic characteristics of a convenience sample of 42 minority women 
attending a health fair in a Southeastern US city.

The Baecke, Burema, and Frijters (1982) instrument for measuring occupational, 
sport, and leisure time physical activity consists of a short questionnaire 
previously tested in the Netherlands. This instrument permits the calculation 
of energy expenditure by considering intensity, duration, and frequency of 
activities. Test-retest reliability using Cronbach's alpha for the 
occupational, sport and leisure time scales was assessed by its developers to 
be .74, .80 and .90 respectively. The Massara and Stunkard (1979) Body Size 
Values Tool (BSVT) consists of 6 photographs deviating from ideal body weight. 
It was used in this study to assess participants' reports of own, ideal, 
healthy, and attractive body sizes. Data were analyzed to discover the 
intensity, frequency, and duration of occupational sport, and leisure physical 
activity of this sample and to relate physical activity practices to body size 
values and sociodemographic characteristics.

Data analysis indicates that the internal consistency of the scales in the 
Baecke, Burema & Frijters instrument is too low for use in this population. 
Problems with the wording of this instrument and its applicability to US 
minority populations will be discussed. The findings from this study will be 
presented with recommendations for future research of physical activity among 
minority groups.

