Use of Self-Prescribed Therapies Among Women with HIV

Richard L. Sowell, Joyce Guillory, Brenda Seals, Linda Moneyham, Leland Cohen, 
and Alice Demi

The lack of a cure and the limited effectiveness of treatments for HIV have 
contributed to a reported use ofa variety of self-prescribed therapies or 
alternative treatment approaches by individuals to take control of their 
health. The potential exists for persons to use self-therapies as a 
replacement for prescribed medical treatments. Further, the possibility of 
side-effects if some alternative chemical therapies are used with prescribed 
drug regimes makes the use of self-prescribed treatment approaches an 
important issue to clinical practitioners. Presently, there is a paucity of 
research that examines the use of self-prescribed treatment approaches by 
women infected with HIV. If women with HIV are to be provided quality health 
care, it will be necessary to determine the prevalence and the type of 
self-prescribed therapies being used within this group in order to coordinate 
these activities with conventional medical care. The purpose of this study is 
to explore the use of self-prescribed therapies by women diagnosed as having 
HIV infection. To capture the broadest possible range of self-prescribed 
therapies, self-therapy was defined as any self initiated practice identified 
by the women as a means of promoting or maintaining their health. Such 
therapies could be used either in conjunction with or as a replacement for 
prescribed medical treatment.

Method - This study used a focus group methodology. Twenty-nine women with HIV 
infection participated in one of 4 focus groups conducted to obtain 
descriptions of participants' health care behaviors. The focus groups were 
held in 4 HIV service organizations located in the southeastern U.S. from May 
to August 1993. Two of the sites were in predominately rural areas, one site 
was in a metropolitan area and one site in a medium sized city. Women 
participating in the focus groups represented a wide range of severity of 
illness from asymptomatic HIV infection to full-blown AIDS. The groups ranged 
in size from four to ten participants. Content analysis was used to analyze 
and interpret the data. Individual pieces of information were categorized and 
coded independently by two members of the research team.

Sample Characteristics - Twenty-one of the participants were African-American, 
five were Caucasian and one participant did not indicate a race. The 
participants ranged in age from 27 to 63 years, with a mean age of 36.5 years. 
Five (17%) of the women had completed some college, 13 (45%) had completed 
high school and 11 (38%) had less than a high school education. Only 3 of the 
participants were currently married. Twenty of the women had children, with 
the number of children ranging from 1 to 7 years.

Findings - Focus group sessions generated 101 descriptions or comments 
concerning the use of self-prescribed therapies to promote or maintain health. 
Participants' comments were analyzed and divided into 9 distinct categories. 
Presented in descending frequency of mention: Vitamins, Minerals and Herbs; 
Decisions Not to Use Physician Prescribed Therapies; Spiritual Reliance and 
Rituals; Exercise; Maintaining a More Positive Attitude; Diet and Nutrition; 
Self-education; Life Style Changes; and Experimental Drug Therapies. These 
findings are discussed in relationship to the development of effective 
treatment strategies for women with HIV/AIDS.

