The Effects of Hysterectomy on Quality of Life

Lee Ogburn-Russell, Mary Pat Lambden, Gail Bellamy, Cheryl Kasberg Preece, 
Sharon Moore, Teri Pepin, Julie Croop, and Gretchen Culbert

PURPOSE: Hysterectomy is one of the most frequently performed surgeries in 
America, with approximately 546,000 performed annually. In this era of 
increasing interest in medical outcomes and cost-containment, outcomes of 
importance to patients such as symptom relief and effects on quality of life 
should be evaluated. The purpose of this study was to examine the quality of 
life, preoperatively and postoperatively, of women undergoing hysterectomy for 
benign conditions.

METHOD: A convenience sample of 250 women undergoing hysterectomies for non-
oncologic reasons completed a three part questionnaire preoperatively and at 
four and eleven months postoperatively. The return rate at 4 months was 82% 
and at 11 months was 78%. The first instrument assessed current health 
information; the second and third were the SF-Depression Scale. Supplemental 
information was abstracted from the subjects' medical records.

SAMPLE: The mean age of the women was 40 and 77% of the women were married or 
living as married. Eighty-one percent of the women were Caucasian, non-
Hispanic; 13% were Black and 4% were Hispanic. The most commonly reported 
gynecological symptom preoperatively was excessive bleeding followed by pelvic 
pain and fibroids.

RESULTS: Overall, women's health status, physically and psychologically, 
improved post-hysterectomy. All scales of the SF-36 reflected statistically 
significant (p<.001) improvement in health status postoperatively at both 4 
and 11 months. Based on the Zung, the women were found to be less depressed 4 
months after surgery compared to before surgery (p<.00001). At 4 months 
postoperatively, 88% of the women answered "strongly agree" or "agree" when 
asked if they felt better. By 11 months, this percentage increased to 93%. The 
women also reported more satisfying relationships postoperatively and less 
difficulties, pain and discomfort during sexual intercourse. Implications and 
recommendations for nursing practice are for increased counseling of women 
considering or awaiting such surgery. Continuing myths regarding hysterectomy, 
specifically, loss of femininity and their sense of value, can be refuted with 
these current research findings.

