Developing an Instrument to Measure Affect in Cognitively Impaired (CI) 
Patients

Cornelia K. Beck

Dementia limits people's options for fulfilling the basic psychosocial needs 
of communication, self-esteem, and autonomy. When these needs remain unmet, 
the individual may experience decreased emotional well-being as signaled by 
increased displays of negative affect and decreased displays of positive 
affect. Measuring the emotional well-being of CI persons is a new research 
area, so few instruments are available.

To successfully measure affect, researchers must be able to repeatedly observe 
events. Videotape recordings often re used for this type of research. From a 
previous study of interventions to decrease disruptive behavior, we have over 
700 videotaped interactions between dementia patients and interventionists. 
These videotapes reveal subjects' change in affect over time, but we were 
unable to locate a suitable instrument for use with our data. Drawing on the 
literature and our observations of CI persons, we developed the Observable 
Displays of Affect Scale (ODAS).

We extracted from the literature and available instruments a total of 514 
words and phrases related to display of affect. Through a three-step process, 
we distilled these into a 34 item observational tool that a panel of experts 
evaluated to establish validity. Two trained observers rated five-minute 
segments of 26 randomly-selected baseline and final treatment week 
intervention videotapes to establish inter- and intra-rater reliabilities. The 
ODAS consists of three subscales: facial display, verbal content, and body 
movement/posture. We tested two interventions in the Disruptive Behavior 
Study: a psychosocial activities intervention, an activities of daily living 
intervention, and a combination of the two. In addition, we had a placebo 
group and a control group. We are using the ODAS to measure the effect of the 
project's interventions on displays of affect in our subjects by comparing 
baseline scores to monthly scores over the 12-week intervention period. In 
this presentation, I will describe the process by which we developed this 
instrument, present preliminary analysis of the videotapes, and show samples 
of our videotapes showing affect changes.

