Theory-Based Intervention and Affiliated-Individuation in Caregivers of Adults 
with Demenita

Gayle Acton and Earline Westphal Miller

PURPOSE: As a part of a larger study, the purpose of this study was to test 
the effect of a theory-based intervention (nurse-led support groups) on levels 
of affiliated-individuation in caregivers of adults with dementia. 
Affiliated-individuation, a theoretical concept from the nursing theory 
Modeling and Role-Modeling, is defined as the inherent need to be affiliated 
with other people and systems (support) while simultaneously remaining 
independent from these same people and systems (control) and maintaining a 
comfort and confidence in both situations. The support group intervention was 
aimed at increasing the caregivers' affiliation with other people and systems 
while simultaneously facilitating the development of resources so the 
caregivers might be able to experience a sense of control over his or her 
caregiving situation.

SAMPLE: The sample consisted of 26 caregivers of adults with dementia.

METHODS: Caregivers attended bi-weekly support groups led by nurses. Data were 
collected pre-intervention (Baseline) and at 6 (Time 1) and 12 (Time 2) months 
post baseline. Safety/security and love/belonging subscales of the Basic Needs 
Satisfaction Index (BNSI) were used to measure affiliation. The subscales of 
esteem/self-esteem and self-actualization of the BNSI were used to measure 
individuation. Data were analyzed via MANOVA to assess within subjects 
variance across time.

FINDINGS: Mean scores for affiliation: Baseline=30.48; Time 1=31.14; Time 2= 
31.79. Mean scores for individuation: Baseline=30.68; Time 1=33.38; Time 2= 
32.24. No significant differences in within subjects variances were found.

SECONDARY FINDINGS: Twelve of the caregivers were interviewed at Time 2 and 
asked, "Overall, what has it been like for you to participate in the support 
groups?". Caregivers said the support groups helped them develop connecting 
relationships with others and described the concepts of acceptance, trust, 
sharing, and safety. Caregivers also stated that the ability to connect with 
themselves was facilitated describing internal strengths, accomplishments, 
decision-making skills, self-worth, and accepting self as essential concepts. 
These data suggest a process that parallels the theoretical and operational 
definition of affiliated-individuation indicating that it may have played an 
important role in their ability to contend with the stress of caregiving. 
Therefore, it is logical to suspect that affiliated-individuation was not 
fully captured via the quantitative measures. The secondary findings will be 
presented to demonstrate the value of collecting and comparing both 
quantitative and qualitative data.

