Alzheimer's Disease: A Continuum of Care Model

Lore K. Wright, Susan deAndrade, Linda D. Chance, and Royce R. Sampson

Problem: Family members who care for demented, agitated elders in their homes 
often experience high levels of stress and depression. In many cases, nursing 
home placement is seen as the only solution to this difficult problem.

Intervention: The continuum of care model is designed to 1) stabilize 
agitation in demented elders in a special geriatric behavioral intensive care 
unit (average length oi stay 8 days), and 2) provide in-home nursing 
interventions following the elder's discharge from the unit. The interventions 
are conducted over a period of one year; they include caregiver education, 
supportive counseling, and mobilization of appropriate community resources. 
The goal is to improve caregivers' well-being and prevent or delay the elders' 
institutionalization.

Design: Families are randomly assigned to either a home intervention or 
phone-calls only (control) group. Initial caregiver assessments are conducted 
by master degree clinical nurse specialists during the demented elder's 
admission to the unit. Family contacts are made within 24 hours post 
discharge, and interventions/phone calls are conducted within one, two, three, 
six, and 12 months post discharge. Outcome measures include the elders' 
agitation, functioning, and number of months before institutionalization, and 
caregivers' stress, depression, physical health, social support, and 
satisfaction with the program.

Findings: Many caregivers who seek help from this program are truly "at the 
end of their rope". Case profile analyses indicate that a large proportion of 
caregivers have very high levels of stress and depression (levels which would, 
under different circumstances, lead to the caregiver's hospitalization). They 
also have poor physical health, and often a resolve to institutionalize the 
elder regardless of the stabilizing effect achieved in the behavioral 
intensive care unit. In these situations, in-home nursing intervention were 
not effective. Elders were institutionalized within two weeks post discharge. 
However, caregivers who were less severely stressed, depressed, and in better 
physical health did benefit from the intervention. Their stress declined, 
their physical and emotional health was maintained, and the demented elders' 
agitation decreased over time to a tolerable level, and they remained at home. 
Control group caregivers, on the other hand, increased in stress and 
depression, and health declined from fair to poor. Demented elders in the 
control group continued to increase in agitation over time, and several were 
readmitted to the unit.

Conclusion: In-home nursing interventions are effective if caregivers seek 
help before their own emotional and physical strengths have been exhausted. 
Increased community education is essential.

