Neonatal Intensive Care: Parents' Perceptions and Perspectives

Deborah A. Raines

Understanding the values and perceptions of parents of Low-birthweight infants 
receiving Neonatal Intensive Care (NIC) can help health care professionals to 
appreciate the needs of facilities and to provide holistic care. The specific 
foci of this research were on developing a understanding of: involvement and 
decision making, perceptions of the NIC process and outcome, and desirable 
care-giver attributes, from the perspective of the parent. The theoretical 
framework guiding this research was Rokeach' s (1973) Nature of Human Values 
and Values Systems. This theory is grounded in the perspective that values are 
motivators of behavior and choices. The significance an individual places on a 
value determines its importance and serves as a criterion to rationalize the 
rightness or wrongness of a choice, action or behavior.

Using a qualitative, exploratory design, data were generated from parent's (n= 
17) of infants admitted to the neonatal unit with a primary presenting problem 
of low-birthweight. This study was limited to parents of infants who had been 
receiving NIC for a minimum of three days, and had no evidence of 
genetic/chromosomal disorders or congenital anomalies requiring surgical 
intervention for correction or palliation at the time of birth. Data were 
collected until emerging categories were elaborated and saturation was 
achieved. The form of data collection was audiotaped interviews that were 
subsequently transcribed into written transcripts for analysis. Interviews 
were conducted using a structured interview guide to assure that all areas of 
interest were explored. Data analysis consisted of decontextualization ad 
recontextualization to identify events, occurrences, or behaviors and to 
establish similarities, relationships, and connections, resulting in the 
emergence of themes.

Four major themes emerged from the data: Being Involved, Technology for 
Survival, A Human Factor, and Caring-Giver Attributes. The theme being 
involved encompassed knowing about the infant's medical status and treatment 
plan, and participating in the infants care during hospitalization. 
Participants acknowledged a lack of knowledge of the medical needs of the 
infant, and expressed a trust in health care providers, yet wanted to develop 
understanding of the infant's needs. A change in perception of NIC, 
experienced by the participants is evident in the themes related to technology 
and human factors. Initially parents' impressions and expectations of NIC were 
focused on the equipment and the belief that technology would fix everything. 
However, over time, parents recognized the essential participation of the 
staff and the powerful nature of the human factor in the management of the 
technology. This human technology interaction was evident in the attributes 
identified as desirable in care givers: competence and caring were given the 
highest priority with communication skill and patience on a secondary level.

