Promoting Competence in Parents of Newborns

Mary Jane Hamilton

Due to societal trends such as smaller families,  geographic mobility, and 
lack of extended families, knowledge and expertise needed by many new parents 
in providing care for a newborn may be less than adequate. Inadequate 
parenting may lead to poor developmental outcomes for the child and ultimately 
for society.

Considerable research has demonstrated important links between qualities of 
caregiver-child interactions and child development outcomes. Researchers have 
established strong relationships between specific elements of early 
caregiver-child interactions and later skills or qualities in the child. Based 
on parental-infant assessment, nursing interventions assisting parents to 
improve the quality of early caregiver-child interactions may greatly enhance 
physical, psycho-social growth and development of the infant.

The purpose of this study was to ascertain the effects of a structured nursing 
intervention in increasing both maternal and paternal observed and perceived 
parental competence. Barnard's Child Health Assessment Interaction Model 
served as the conceptual framework for the study. The sample consisted of 
forty-nine expectant parental dyads who were randomly assigned to either the 
experimental or control group. Subjects' caregiver-child interactions were 
rated using the Nursing Child Assessment Feeding Scale and the 
Gibaud-Wallston's Parenting Sense of Competence Scale at preintervention and 
postintervention.

The structured intervention consisted of an explanation, demonstration, and 
return demonstration of the Infant Behavioral Assessment Record between the 
nurse and subjects. The intervention which included a demonstration of the 
infants' behavioral cues and parental responses lasted approximately 20 
minutes. Findings showed that mothers receiving the intervention were more 
verbally and physically responsive to their infants than mothers who did not 
receive the intervention. Fathers, who received the intervention, had 
significant mean increases in their measures of perceived parental competence, 
suggesting that with explanation and demonstration of infant behaviors, men 
may feel more confident in their parenting roles and increase their 
perceptions of themselves as parents.

While the majority of previous research has focused upon the mother-child 
interaction, this study focuses on the family as a reciprocal unit. With early 
discharge, inconsistent followup and teaching newborn care behaviors, the 
nurse has a pivotal role in the adjustment of the new family. A cost 
effective, timely intervention to increase maternal and paternal competence is 
critical for adjustment of new families. Replication of this research and 
implementation of the intervention with a larger, more culturally diverse 
population are recommended.

