The Relationship Between Tranepidermal Water Loss and Humidity in Very Low 
Birth Weight Infants

Heidi V. Krowchuk, Ruth F. Hoffman, and Penny G. Blake

Water losses through the skin affect the thermal regulation and the fluid and 
electrolyte balance of very low birth weight (VLBW) infants. Disturbances of 
heat and water balance are pronounced in VLBW infants due to the increased 
permeability of their immature skin. Ambient humidity of the environment may 
be one factor contributing to TEWL; in studies with full-term infants, TEWL 
was negatively correlated with humidity measurements. The purpose of this 
study was to examine the relationship between transepidermal water loss (TEWL) 
and relative ambient humidity of the environment of VLBW infants during the 
first 9 days of life. A correlational design was used to examine this 
relationship, and the study was approved by the appropriate Institutional 
Review Boards prior to its conduct. After written consent was obtained from 
the parents, 43 VLBW infants admitted consecutively to the Level RI Neonatal 
Intensive Care Unit over a six month period and who fulfilled the study 
criteria were enrolled. The sample consisted of 30 female and 13 male VLBW 
infants with a mean gestational age of 25.7 weeks (SD = 1.7) and a mean birth 
weight of 858.2 grams (SD = 200.3). All infants were enrolled in the study 
within 32 hours of birth (M = 16.8, SD = 6.0), and all infants were cared for 
in double-walled isolettes during the duration of the study. TEWL measurements 
were obtained from the subjects' abdominal skin, and ambient humidity 
measurements were obtained from inside subjects' isolettes (after a 10 minute 
period of equilibration) on 1, 3, 5, 7, and 9 days of life using an 
Evaporimeter (ServoMed, Stockholm), which is a valid and reliable instrument 
for determimng TEWL and ambient humidity. The Evaporimeter measures water 
evaporation from the skin within the range of 0 - 300g/m2h (grams per meter 
squared per hour), and relative humidity within the range of 0 - 100%. TEWL 
measurements over the nine days reflected maturation of the subjects' skin and 
ranged from 4 - 108g/m2h; measurements obtained on day 1 were the highest (M = 
43.5, SD = 25.0), and the measurements on day 9 were the lowest (M = 15.6, SD 
= 5.4). Ambient humidity of the environment of the VLBW ranged from 22% to 
86%; however, mean humidity measurements ranged from 35.8% (SD = 8.3) to 42.8% 
(SD = 17.5). The relationships between TEWL measurements and ambient humidity 
measurements from the 5 data collection points (days 1, 3, 5, 7, and 9) were 
calculated using the Pearson Correlation Coefficient. The tests revealed no 
statistically significant relationships. Further analyses revealed a 
statistically significant negative correlation between TEWL and the variables 
of gestational age (r = -0.53, p <.0001) and birth weight (r = -0.55, p 
<.0001). The results of this study demonstrate that ambient humidity was not 
related to TEWL in the VLBW infants in the sample; that is, TEWL was not 
increased by lower humidity levels. This has important practice implications, 
since ideal isolette humidity levels for VLBW infants have been thought to be 
about 50-70%. Further study needs to be done to determine if manipulating the 
ambient humidity effects the TEWL of VLBW infants.

