Standardized Rest Periods for Preterms: Apnea and Weight Gain Effects

Daine Holditch-Davis, Carol Torres, Ann O'Hale, and Betty Tucker

The stimulation provided by the intermediate care unit is known to be 
inappropriate for the development of sleeping and waking in preterm infants. 
Modifying multiple aspects of this environment has been shown to reduce the 
length of stay of infants probably by reducing the incidence of apnea and/or 
by improving the rate of weight gain. The purpose of this study was to 
determine the effect of modifying a single aspect of the intermediate care 
environment on the incidence of apnea and weight gain in convalescent preterm 
infants. Previous analysis of this intervention had showed that it affected 
the sleeping and waking patterns of infants, resulting longer undisturbed 
sleep periods.

Twenty-two preterm infants from an intermediate care nursery (ICN) were 
assigned to experimental and control groups using a randomized, matched pair 
design. Experimental infants had a mean gestational age of 27.6 weeks and 
birth weight of 899 gm; control infants a mean gestational age of 28.0 weeks 
and birthweight of 896 gm. Over a 3 week period, experimental infants were 
provided a 1 1/2-hour nap period 4 times a day during which their beds were 
covered and they were left undisturbed. One nap each was on the day and 
evening shifts, and two on the night shift to provide day-night 
differentiation. Control infants received standard nursing care. Apnea and 
weight were recorded daily from the medical records.

Although the experimental infants had more apnea at the start of the study 
than the control infants (1.3 episodes/day versus 0.4), the average daily 
amount of apnea over the 3 weeks of the study did not differ between the 
groups (t(20) = 1.15). However, when the change over tune in the amount of 
apnea was compared, the experimental infants showed a significantly more rapid 
decline in the incidence of apnea, as determined by comparing the slopes of 
the regression of apnea over age (t(38) = 2.77, p < .01). In addition, an 
analysis of covariance using weight on entry into the study as a covariate, 
showed that the experimental infants gained significantly more weight per day 
than the control infants (21.2 g vs. 16.0 g, (F(1,19) = 4.84, p < .05) so that 
by the end of the 3 weeks the experimental infants weighted an average of 1600 
g and the control infants 1419 g.

Thus, a simple modification of nursing care that involved minimal increases in 
nursing time had an impact not only on the sleeping and waking of preterm 
infants but also on the incidence of apnea and rate of weight gain. All of 
these effects would lead to a shortened length of hospitization for the 
experimental infants. Since a simple modification of nursing care had 
relatively large effects, practicing nurses need to carefully evaluate nursing 
care to deteremine whether all aspects are needed and effective.

