Being in Relation to Others: Social Support and Long Term Survivors of AIDS

Julie Barroso

On concern to nurses who care for people with HIV desase is how to assist them 
to best utilize social support available to them. In an illness unparalleled 
by the stigma suffered by those infected, social support is a crucial 
dimension in supporting them to find a level of health within the context of 
their illness. This paper presents data on social support and long term 
survivors of AIDS. It is part of a larger study on the phenomenon of becoming 
a long term survivor of AIDS.

A naturalistic study design using multiple intensive ethnographic interviews 
was employed to elicit data from 14 men and 6 women who were long term 
survivors of AIDS. Theortecial and purposive sampling techniques were used to 
elicit participants in the Tampa Bay area. Criteria for selection included 
being at least 18 years old and English speaking; being in Stage IV of HIV 
disease for at least 3 years; and self-definition as a long term survivor. 
Data were generated through multiple intensive open-ended interviews, 
demographic information sheets, and self-reporting of T4 cell counts. Data 
were analyzed using manifest and latent content analysis techniques and the 
method of constant comparison.

One of the dimensions that emerged from the data was one titled "being in 
relation to others." This was the interpersonal dimension of becoming a long 
term survivor of AIDS, and was defined as a complex set of interpersonal 
relationships that had been renegotiated due to the stigma of AIDS and its 
modes of transmission; many of the participants found themselves rejected by 
family and friends. Participants realized they ahd to establish new 
relationships and renegotiate old relationships in order to survive with AIDS. 
Specific ways of being in relation to others included dealing with one's 
family, renegotiating their friendship group, helping others with HIV, and 
developing a relationship with a higher power.

The traditional concept of social support ususally involves the provision of 
direct assistance or emotional support. The results of this study offer a more 
complex view of social support which includes the renegotiation of roles, 
dealing with the stigma of a disease, and reassemmbling the support network. 
It also addresses the idea of a relationship with a higher power as a form of 
social support.

The results of this study have implications for counseling people with HIV 
disease, and for nursing actions to enhance social support in this vulnerable 
group.

