Perceptions of Nutritional Beliefs and Behaviors of Persons with HIV/AIDS

Priscilla W. Koester

The purpose of this study was to identify and describe nutritional beliefs and 
behaviors of persons living with HIV/AIDS (PLWH/A). While nutrition and 
dietary control are influential variables in coping with several acute and 
chronic diseases, the nutritional beliefs and practices of PLWH/A are 
underrepresented in the research literature. Therefore a grounded theory 
approach was used to answer the following research questions: 1) What are the 
beliefs and behaviors related to nutrition held by persons with HIV/AIDS? 2) 
How do persons with HIV/AIDS determine when and with what to supplement their 
nutritional intake? 3) What sources and types of information enter into 
nutritional decisions by persons with HIV/AIDS?

Purposeful sampling was employed to identify 28 HIV+ participants who utilized 
the services of a hospital-based Special Diseae Unit in a large southwestern 
city. Two audiotaped interviews were conducted with each of the participants 
across home and hospital settings.

Transcribed interview data were analyzed using content analysis and constant 
comparison. Findings revealed an emergent framework. Taking charge, that 
PLWH/A used to manage their nutritional intake. The strategies described 
within Taking Charge are: Continuing, Exploring, Experimenting, and 
Committing. As PLWH/A moved from Continuing to Committing, they assumed 
increasing responsibility for their nutritional intake. Wasting and other 
changes in health status prompted PLWH/A to explore and experiment with new 
foods, different preparation methods and supplements. PLWH/A who perceived 
that their chosen foods and supplements were beneficial, committed to regular 
use. Their selection of specific foods was highly individualized and dependent 
upon available information. Also in the findings nurses were not considered as 
resources for nutritional information.

The results of this study imply that nurses should identify the nutritional 
strategy used by their patients and aim their care to support that strategy. A 
collaborative model, utilizing the skills of PLWH/A, nurses, and dietitians, 
should be developed to provide nutritional support for the strategies that 
PLWH/A use.

