Stressors, Resources, Burden, and Family Functioning of Family members who are 
a Primary Support to an HIV Infected Woman

Alice Demi, Richard Sowell, and Linda Moneyham

Background: Hiv infection is known to raise many issues and concerns in 
infected persons and in family members. To date, most research on the ipact of 
HIV on families has focused on the families of gay men. The demographic 
characteristics and social environment of HIV infected women and their 
families differ dramatically from that of gay men. The majority of HIV 
infected women are people of color, lower economic status, less educated, and 
reside in diverse urban and non-urban locales, thus what is known about gay 
men's families may not be relevant to HIV infected women's families.

Specific aims: The purpose of this study was twofold: first, to describe the 
characteristics of family members' who were identified as being a primary 
support to an HIV infected woman and; second, to assess the relationships 
among family members stressors, resources, burden, and family functioning.

Research questions: Who are the people that are identified as providing 
primary support to HIV infected women? What are the best predictors of family 
members' burden? What are the best predictors of amily members' family 
functioning?

Hypotheses: 1) HIV infected women's health status and need for help will be 
positively related to family members' burden. 2) Social support and resources, 
will be positively related to family members' family functioning.

Sample: The 151 HIV infected women matched with 151 family members (who were 
identified by the women as a primary support person and were knowledgeable of 
the woman's HIV status) were recruited from 8 AIDS/HIV public health treatment 
sites in a southeastern state.

Instruments: FACES was used to assess family functioning; Burden was assessed 
with a revised version of the Zarit Burden scale; and social support and 
resources were measured with scales developed by Dunst and his colleagues.

Data analysis: Data were analyzed using descriptive statistics, correlations 
and multiple regression. Internal consistency reliability was computed for all 
scales for which it was appropriate.

Findings: The women ranged in age from 16 to 58, while the family members 
ranged in age from 16-71; the majority in both groups were African-American 
(80% and 82% respectively). The family members tended to be female (59%) and 
the majority knew the woman for more than 6 years (44%), while only 41% lived 
in the same household with the woman. The best predictors of Burden and family 
functioning were identified through multiple regression.
Implications: Findings from this sutdy may be useful in helping develop 
programs to meet the needs of family members who are providing care to HIV 
infected women.

