Metaphors and Community-Based Care of People with HIV Infection and 
Significant Others

Gail M. Powell-Cope

As care for people with HIV infection becomes increasingly community-based 
health care providers must pay attention to how people use these services in 
order to design and implement programs with clients' perspectives in mind. One 
way to learn about clients' perspectives is to elicit the metaphors (that is, 
the names people give to things that belong to other things) they use. 
Understanding these metaphors will help health care providers to design more 
effective and humane services. Therefore, the purpose of this paper is to 
discuss common metaphors people with HIV and their significant others use to 
describe community-based HIV health and social services.

Participatory research methods were used. The sample consisted of 20 adults 
with HIV infection, at all phases of teh illness, and the designated 
significant other. Using an open-ended , semi-structured format, in depth 
interviews were completed. Participants were asked to describe their 
experiences in obtaining and retaining community-based HIV services. 
Interviews were transcribed, coded and analyzed using constant comparative 
analysis. Reliability and validity were addressed consistent with qualitative 
methods.

The metaphors people used to describe the community-based health care system 
provided a means for expressing self identities and for describing their 
relationships with health care providers. Furthermore, each metaphor 
represented a distinct type of power relationship with community-based 
organizations and the people who work in those organizations. Common metaphors 
used to describe community-based care were a: maze, battle, and game. The maze 
metaphor was used by people who were novices in using the care system. They 
perceived services as mysterious and confusing and tended to use services 
through a trial-and-error method. People who used the battle metaphor were 
often people in transition from novices to seasoned users of community 
services. Those engaged in battle were beginning to learn how to be self-
advocates, but let anger drive many of their interactions with care systems. 
They tended to view services and service providers as hostile and were 
motivated by the will to survive HIV infection. Those who perceived serves as 
a game were the "wise" because they knew how to makethe system work for 
themselves and for friends. They effectely used the formal and informal care 
systems, applied spoken and unspoken rules of the game, and used assertiveness 
selectively to obtain services.

Recognizing these metaphors is important for health care providers because 
they provide insight into how clients use care systems. Providers can begin, 
then, to work with people from their frame fo references in order to provide 
the most appropriate and humane care. Because metaphors inform health care 
providers how they are perceived by clients, health care providers can use 
metaphors for self-understanding as a basis for interacting with clients and 
for designing effective community-based services.

