In-Home and Community Service Use by African-American Elders

Debra C. Wallace, Eva Napier, and Tim Fox

The purpose of this study was to examine in-home and community service use 
among African-American elders (65+) in a southeastern state. African-American 
elders have unique cultural health beliefs and behaviors and are considered a 
vulnerable group with respect to health and well-being (Healthy People 2000). 
This vulnerability may be exacerbated by the proposed budget cuts to the Older 
Americans and Social Security Acts. However, there is little scientific 
evidence on which to validate past and justify future allocations for 
federally mandated care provided by the aging network to this group of elders.

Cox/s Interaction Model of Client Health Behavior was used to guide the study. 
Two research questions were addressed: a) which demographic characteristics, 
social influences, environmental resources, and previous health care 
experiences were deterministic of higher service use among African-American 
elders? and b) which demographic characteristics, social influences, 
environmental resources, and previous health care experiences were predictors 
of use of specific services among African-American elders?

Records of 931 African-American elderly clients of an Area Agency on Aging in 
South Carolina provided sample data. Males and rural elders are represented in 
proportions similar to population statistics; low income elders are 
overrepresented. Multiple linear regression was used to determine 
characteristics of elders likely to use higher numbers of services; multiple 
logistic regression was used to determine elders most likely to use specific 
services.

Arthritis, hypertension, heart disease, and diabetes were the most frequent 
health conditions experienced. These conditions are consistent with national 
causes of death and disability among older persons nationally, as was the rate 
of co-morbidity. Case management, congregate meal, home delivered meal, 
outreach, and commodity distribution were the most frequently used services. 
Age, rural vs. urban residence, number and type of health problem, sensory 
impairment, and instrumental activities of daily living were predictors of 
use; gender, marital status, living arrangement, payment source, and 
activities of daily living were not predictors.

Implications for advanced practice, health policy, resource allocation, health 
care delivery, and case management will be discussed.

