Dimensions of Understanding in Cross-Cultural Nurse-Client Realtionships: A 
Qualitative Nursing Study

Margaret Osborne

During the last two decades European immigration to Canada has decreased while 
the number of immigrants from Asia and Latin America has increased (Canadian 
Task Force, 1988). The potential for cross-cultural misunderstanding is 
evident given the differences in the explanatory models of mental health and 
illness between these immigrants and the dominant Canadian culture. 
Consequently, the health needs for this client population may be unmet and 
services not utilized. Even though nursing plays a major role in the provision 
of mental health care where nurse-client encounters are the focus of practice, 
there has been little published research about the cross-cultural 
interactional process.

The purpose of this study was to describe and explore what constitutes 
understanding within the cross-cultural nurse-client relationship, in the 
context of mental health-psychiatric nursing practice. The conceptual 
orientation was based upon the sensitizing concepts of explanatory model 
(KIeinman, 1978) and caring (Watson, 1988, Gadow, 1988, Noddings, 1984).

A naturalistic, descriptive research design, incorporating intensive, semi- 
structured, ethnographic interviews and participant observations was used. 
Nurse-client dyads, from community psychiatric rehabilitation programs 
participated. Thematic analysis was used to induct dimensions of understanding 
in cross-cultural nurse-client encounters. The impact of the nurse's and 
client's explanatory models of mental health and illness on the development of 
understanding, and factors which facilitated or impeded the development of 
understanding were generated.

Study findings suggested that understanding was comprised of five dimensions. 
The dimensions clustered into two groups: core dimensions were behaviors which 
gave entry into and enabled the cultural negotiation of the care process; and 
secondary dimensions were behaviors essential to supporting the facilitation 
of the core dimensions. Core dimensions were managing the language barrier and 
the exploration of explanatory models of mental health and mental illness. 
Essential, supportive dimensions were commitment to a human to human 
relationship, connecting in a culturally sensitive way and taking time.

Three areas of relevance for nursing were: the multi-dimensional, complexity 
of the cross-cultural interactional process; a further contribution to 
nursing's body of knowledge on caring; the usefulness of the explanatory model 
concept in eliciting the influences of personal/professional knowing and the 
enviromnent as factors impacting the development of understanding.

