Georgia's Twenties Century Public Health Nurses A Social History of Racial 
Relations

Rose Broeckel Cannon

In Georgia during the early twentieth century Jim Crow "separate but equal" 
mentality sifted like blowing sand into every crevice of society. Life under 
Jim Crow, however, was never equal. This study examines the way in which 
Georgia's twentieth-century Black and white public health nurses responded to 
issues of race in their early personal lives and into their professional 
careers. Differences in racial experiences were noted between those born and 
reared in rural and urban communities, and those who moved in and out of the 
South for military and post-graduate education. The effect of the depression, 
World War II, and the coming of civil rights were specific historical time 
periods that applied to these nurses' experiences with race.

Racial customs were distinctive in each Georgia public health setting 
explored: in the cities of Atlanta, Savannah, and Macon, and in various rural 
areas. The examination of forty-five interviews from The Georgia Nursing 
History Project disclosed differing perceptions of race and racial issues 
among Black and white public health nurses as they discussed their daily 
lives, their work, and their professional organizations. Discriminatory 
policies such as inequality of salaries and educational opportunity, and 
differences in titling, were largely overcome through social action by the 
Black nurses with the support and encouragement they found in their separate 
nursing organizations.

The amount of awareness of inequalities due to race by the White nurses varied 
from denial, to feelings of sympathy, and in some, hope for an end to 
segregation. Changes in the health departments brought about by law in the 
1960s transpired smoothly. There is no indication that the white nurses 
interviewed opposed changes in racial customs in the health departments, but 
none participated in actions of social change with their Black colleagues.

The interviews show the difficulty in overcoming racial attitudes instilled 
from childhood and reinforced by living within a segregated society. These 
attitudes and values are illuminated in the narratives of the nurses who in 
their own voices so willingly shared their experiences to preserve a portion 
of the history of public health nursing in Georgia.

