Illness Experiences and Health-Recovery Behaviors of Patients in Southern 
Appalachia

Mary Ann Rosswurm, Debra Dent, Cyndi Armstrong-Persily, Paula Woodburn, and 
Barbara Davis

The impact of culture on health care delivery and health outcomes is often 
given inadequate consideration, particularly in acute care settings. The 
purpose of this exploratory study was to gain a better understanding of the 
influences of Appalachian culture and rural living on patients' illness 
experiences and health recovery behaviors. An adaptation of Cox's Interaction 
Model of Client Health Behavior served as the organizing framework for this 
study. Within this framework, patient/health professional interaction was 
explored by comparing their value systems and their opinions about patient 
participation in decision-making. Relationships of health outcomes with 
patient background variables were also examined.

The study sample consisted of 257 randomly selected adult patients, who were 
admitted to medical-surgical units from eight hospitals in West Virginia, a 
state in the Southern Appalachian Region. The mean age of patients was 57 
years. Patients completed interviews in the hospital and phone interviews two 
weeks after hospital discharge. A subset of 28 native-born Appalachian 
patients from the sample participated in home interviews. In addition, 203 
nurses and 79 physicians completed value rankings and decisional-control 
questions.

Quantitative and qualitative data were triangulated. The data suggested that 
illness and health recovery are affected by culture, age, gender, and rural 
residence. Although there was evidence of cultural change, traditional values 
and roles persisted in this population and influenced health behaviors. 
Patients perceived themselves as being able to cope with illness and 
disability better than preventing illness. They made very few changes to a 
healthier lifestyle post-hospitalization. Cardiovascular and respiratory 
problems were comnon health problems. Patients did not wish to be involved in 
decision-making to the extent nurses would like them to participate. They 
relied on taking medications for health recovery. Patients identified health 
and family as their most important values. Health was perceived as being able 
to carry out everyday activities.

The comprehensive picture of the illness experience and health-recovery 
behaviors described in this study generate ideas for future intervention 
studies for improving health outcomes for various cultural groups and rural 
populations.

