The Effects of Bedrest and Activity on Exygen Balance: A Validation Study for 
the Nursing Diagnosis of Activity Intolerance

Diane O. Tyler

Introduction: Bedrest and oxygen supply/demand imbalances are identified as 
key factors associated with poor activity tolerance. Nurses assess tolerance 
to activity and make judgments about progressive activity levels based on the 
individual's responses; however, consensus on the indicators of poor tolerance 
is not well established in the discipline.

Purpose & Design: A descriptive, correlational study with a repeated measures 
design was employed to validate the indicators and contributing factors 
associated with activity tolerance. The specific aims of this study were: (1) 
to describe the physiologic and self-reported responses that occur with the 
initial post-bedrest activity of chair-sitting in a homogeneous sample of 
critically ill patients, (2) to examine the relationships between these 
responses and oxygen supply/demand balance, and (3) to examine the 
relationship between activity responses and length of bedrest.

Methods: The sample consisted of 25 coronary artery bypass graft patients who 
had been on continuous bedrest since surgery. The dependent variables were the 
defining characteristics for the NANDA nursing diagnosis of Activity 
Intolerance (e.g., heart rate and rhythm, systolic and diastolic blood 
pressure, dyspnea, fatigue, weakness, and discomfort); each were measured 
before, during and after the first post-operative chair-sitting activity. Data 
to calculate oxygen consumption, oxygen delivery, and the oxygen extraction 
ratio (e.g., ratio of oxygen consumption to delivery which was the indicator 
of oxygen balance) were also measured at each time period. Descriptive 
statistics and parametric and nonparametric tests of significance were applied 
to the data.
Findings: Small, yet statistically significant, transient changes in 
physiological and perceptual response patterns were seen in most of the 
variables. These responses were consistent with adaptations to orthostatic 
positioning, exertion and sympathetic nervous system stimulation, which are 
well documented in healthy subjects and other cardiac patients. Few clinically 
significant changes were found, with most occurring in the postactivity 
period. Oxygen consumption and extraction increased with activity, and oxygen 
extraction remained significantiy elevated after 10 minutes of supine rest. 
Oxygen delivery was below normal, but remained constant throughout the study. 
Mean time on bedrest was 31 hours. Nonsignificant correlations were found 
between bedrest and oxygen balance and between these factors and NANDA's 
defining characteristics.

Implications: The increase in oxygen consumption in the presence of a low 
oxygen delivery placed the patients at risk for an oxygen supply/demand 
imbalance. The high tissue oxygen extraction and generally small changes seen 
in most parameters indicate that the increased oxygen extraction by the 
tissues was sufficient to maintain homeostasis without necessitating major 
adjustments in other responses. Thus, oxygen extraction, the measure of oxygen 
balance in this study, is seen as a contributing factor for activity 
tolerance. The short duration of bedrest accounted for little variance in the 
responses to activity and was not identified as a significant factor in the 
patients' tolerance. Intersubject variability in response patterns was seen 
and clinically significant changes were found even during postactivity rest, 
indicating patients require evaluation before, during and after activity to 
assess for tolerance. The findings document normal and abnormal patterns of 
adaptation to the stress of activity after bedrest in patients at risk for 
poor tolerance. They also serve to validate the etiological nature of activity 
tolerance and to an empirical basis for prescribing and monitoring activity 
following acute illness.

