Cardiovascular Reactivity During Cognitive Stress in Women Before and After 
Coronary Artery Bypass Grafts

Judith McFetridge

Data from recent studies have identified female gender as a risk factor for 
operative mortality during coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) and for 
prolonged hospital stay afterwards. Although there is evidence that 
cardiovascular reactivity in men with ischemic heart disease (IHD) may be 
associated with an increase in afterload, data are not available to explain 
the mechanisms associated with cardiovascular reactivity in women. The purpose 
of this study was to describe cardiovascular reactivity during cognitive 
stress in women with IHD before and after myocardial reperfusion. The 
following hypotheses were tested: (a) heart rate (HR), systolic blood pressure 
(SBP), diastolic blood pressure (DBP), and mean arterial pressure (MAP) will 
increase significantly from baseline during cognitive stress; (b) stroke 
volume (SV), cardiac output (CO) and myocardial contractility (MC) will not 
change significantly from baseline during cognitive stress before CABG but 
will increase significantly from baseline during cognitive stress following 
CABG; and (c) total peripheral resistance (TPR) will not change significantly 
from baseline during cognitive stress prior to CABG, but will decrease 
significantly from baseline during cognitive stress following CABG.

The study was quasi-experimental with a test-retest design. The independent 
variable was cognitive stress and the Stroop Color Word Test (SCWT) was used 
to induce cognitive stress. The dependent variable was cardiovascular 
reactivity and the empirical indicators were HR, SV, CO, MC, SBP, DBP, MAP, 
and TPR. The Minnesota Impedance Cardiograph (model 304b) and the Marshall 95 
sphygmomanometer were used to measure these variables before, during, and 
after the administration of the SCWT. Forty-two women participated in the 
study, 21 with IHD and 21 healthy controls. Forty-one subjects were Caucasian, 
one was African American and the mean age was 66.6 years. Subjects in the IHD 
group were tested one day prior to CABG and three or five days following CABG, 
and subjects in the control group were tested on two occasions, one week 
apart. Multivariate repeated measures analysis of variance was used to test 
the hypothesis of no change in cardiovascular reactivity during cognitive 
stress within subject, between subjects, and 
within-subject-by-between-subjects interaction. The significance level was set 
at 0.05.

The results of the analysis supported the hypotheses. Heart rate, CO and MAP 
increased significantly from resting baseline during the SCWT before and after 
CABG (P<0.05). Stroke volume and myocardial contractility did not change 
significantly from resting baseline during the SCWT before CABG (p>0.05), but 
increased significantly from resting baseline following CABG (p<0.05). Total 
peripheral resistance did not change significantly from resting baseline 
during the SCWT prior to CABG (p>0.05), but decreased significantly from 
resting baseline during the SCWT following CABG (p<0.05). The findings in the 
control group were comparable to those documented in the IHD group following 
CABG. These findings suggest that afterload may increase during cognitive 
stress in women with IHD prior to myocardial reperfusion. An increase in 
afterload in the presence of compromised coronary blood flow places the woman 
with IHD at risk for myocardial ischemia.

