Symptoms and Characteristcs of Women Experiencing a Myocardial Infarction

Jean C. McSweeney

Purpose of Study: Coronary heart disease (CHD) is now the leading cause of 
death and disability in women. Associated costs of cardiovascular disease in 
women are expected to surpass $128 billion in 1995. These costs continue to 
soar as the life span of women increases. However researchers have 
traditionally studied CHD and specifically myocardial infarction (MI) as 
diseases of men and ignored the effect of the disease on women. Little is 
known about what symptoms women exhibit surrounding a MI and what 
characteristics women have in common who experience a MI. The purpose of this 
study was to explore these issues.

Research Question: What symptoms are reported by women surrounding their 
myocardial infarction? Questions related to common characteristics emerged 
from commonalties identified during initial interviews.

Theoretical Orientation and Methods: Kleinman's concept of explanatory models, 
common sense understandings of an illness expenence, was used to elicit 
illness narratives surrounding the MI experience. A descriptive and naturistic 
field study design using indepth interviews was employed purposive 
nonprobability sampling was utilized to select 20 ethnically and 
socioeconomically diverse women between the ages of 34-77 who had experienced 
their first known MI within the previous 6-24 months. Education ranged from 
less than eight years to masters preparation.

Data Generation and Analysis: Data were generated by intensive indepth 
interviews which followed a semi-structured format and focused on the symptoms 
women reported prior to being diagnosed with a MI. Interviews were tape 
recorded, transcribed verbatim, entered into Ethnograph computer program, and 
analyzed by the techniques of content analysis and constant compartson.

Findings and Implications: All women who experienced a MI under the age of 60 
were working full time. Ninety-five percent had experienced menopause or had 
hysterectomies (60%) but only 2 were on estrogen replacement therapy (ERT). No 
subjects had discussed the cardiac benefits of ERT with a health professional. 
Five were taking vitamins and 4 were taking antioxidants up to one year prior 
to the MJ. Symptoms reported included severe faugue up to 1 week prior to MI 
(75%), pain in the back under the shoulder blades (35%), pain radiating to the 
right arm (10%), both arms (20%) and localIzed chest pain (15%). Thirty-flve 
percent reported no to mild pain while 10% reported crushing pain. Chest pain 
typically occurred as a late symptom. Another common complaint was tingling 
and/or heaviness in the arms while two women experienced migraine headaches 
for the first time prior to the MI. Since women experienced atypical symptoms 
such as mild discomfort, fatigue and back pain, over 50% delayed seeking 
treatment for 24 hours. Seven reported delayed diagnoses of MI after entering 
the health care system. Of this group, one was sent home while 3 infarcted 1-3 
days later while being treated for stress. More research is needed to document 
symptoms and characteristics of women who have experienced a MI so that 
commonly occurring symptoms may be identified and taught to women, nurses, and 
physicians. This should result in more timely reporting of symptoms, earlier 
treatment, less disability and thus decreased costs associated with MI in 
women.

