Mortality Probability Model in Patients with Acute Myocardial Infarction

Doris J Rosenow

Specific Aims: Among the elderly, cardiovascular disease now ranks as the 
leading cause of disability and death. Patients who suffer an acute myocardial 
infarction (AMI) are a very heterogeneous group whose prognosis after an AMI 
differs widely. Studies have shown that approxiinately 10% to 29% of 
hospitalized patients after AMI will not live to be discharged. Therefore, the 
specific aims of this study were to: (1) determine factors predictive of 
hospital mortality in patients with AMI; and (2) examine the usefulness of 
three severity of illness indices.

Research Question: What are the predictive factors of hospital mortality in 
patients with acute myocardial infarction?

Methodology: Data was collected by a retrospective chart review. A pilot study 
of 110 charts of men and women diagnosed with AMI who had expired in a 
Southwestern University Medical were reviewed. The three severity of illness 
indices that were used for data collection were: (1) Funk & Pooley-Richards 
(1994) Coronary Prognostic Indices which included five variables [history of 
AMI, older age, lower LVEF, and a higher number of occluded coronary vessels]; 
(2) Dubois, Pierard, Albert, et al., (1988) Prognostic Index which included 
three subgroups of patients [high risk, intermediate risk, and good 
prognosis]; and (3) Gustafson, Fryback, Rose, et al., (1986) Ischemic Heart 
Disease Index (IHDI) which included 10 categones; time from onset of symptoms, 
duration of pain, age, previous heart disease, preexisting second organ 
disease, family and social history, electrical instability, amount of 
myocardial damage, presence of acute MI, and electrical complications.

Data Analysis: A logistic regression analysis will be used to determine the 
results of the study. At present, the data analysis is not completed. 
Therefore, the findings will be presented at the conference, which will 
include a mortality probability model for patients at high risk for mortality 
after an AMI.

Implications: Clinical assessment of those patients for high risk mortality 
after an AMI should lead to closer monitoring, selective and more focused 
intervention regimes which would provide more timely management decisions.

