Administrative Support for a Program of Research

Barbara Farley

In the early 90's, MCVH was a 1000 bed university affiliated health care 
facility with a strong interest in nursing research. However, the 
organizational culture necessary to build a program of research was missing. 
Therefore, creating the appropriate culture and building the organizational 
structure necessary to meet the research mission was identified as a priority.

Building the infrastructure started with enhancing professional nursing 
practice and clarifying expectations. Collaboration with colleagues from the 
School of Nursing provided the initial guidance and support for many of these 
efforts. The development of a Professional Practice Model and the 
implementation of a clinical ladder provided opportunities to include research 
expectations into nursing practice. Job descriptions were rewritten to include 
research at all levels, from novice to expert.

These efforts resulted in the development of a Director of Nursing Research 
position. Although funding was not obtained in the first budget cycle, 
persistence eventually was successful. Negotiations with the School of Nursing 
resulted in a jointly funded position. An important aspect was the excitement 
generated which generated support from all nursing levels.

However, the nurse executive's role in this setting was not only to advocate 
within the nursing department, but also to educate administrative colleagues, 
many of whom who had not been exposed to the benefits of nursing research. 
Emphasizing the importance of research to quality of care helped sustain 
support at all levels.

One of the aspects of my job which I enjoy most, is to reward all scholarly 
efforts, great and small, in as many ways and forums as possible. As of this 
writing, 60 nursing research studies are underway and 5 funded grants have 
been obtained. Other accomplishments for the 1994-1995 year included: 12 peer-
reviewed publications, 17 national peer-reviewed presentations and 36 
peer-reviewed poster sessions. Nursing research is off to a good start in this 
setting!

