Creating a Climate for Scholarship Through Education and Professional 
Development

Lauren R. Goodloe

Creating a climate that promoted scholarship within nursing services involved 
a multifaceted approach. Key to the creation of such a climate was an emphasis 
on the continuing education and development of nurses. Five years ago, nursing 
leadership concentrated on the professional development of nurses at the 
Medical College of Virginia Hospitals (MCVH) in order to create a 
patient/family focused environment which was known for research based, expert 
level nursing care.

The foundation was created using several strategies: 1) leadership, support, 
clear expectations and a vision from the Nurse Executive; 2) development of a 
values statement for nursing practice that clearly focused on 
patients/families as well as the expectations of nursing practice and 
professional development; 3) implementation of a model of practice (Primary 
Nursing) that supported the values; and 4) a Professional Advancement Program 
that recognized and rewarded clinical practice, research and professional 
development. The development, implementation, and outcomes of each of these 
will be discussed.

Although nurses at MCVH were always encouraged to attend conferences, present 
papers and posters, and write for publication; nursing research efforts were 
weak. In order to build a strong research component into clinical nursing 
practice, an expert was needed to guide the process. A position was created 
for a Director of Nursing Research to focus on developing a research climate 
within nursing services through education, consultation and coaching.

There are a number of other ways in which MCVH supports the professional 
development of nurses and encourages the creation of a scholarly practice 
environment. In a time when many hospitals are elminating Education and 
Development departments, MCVH has made a conscious effort to support a 
department such as this to ensure that professional development, education and 
research continue for our employees. The focus of this department and other 
support programs will be discussed.

