Developing and Implementing a Research Agenda

Eileen F. Morrison

Many clinical researchers have emphasized the CNS role in the conduction of 
research as a way to fulfill a hospital's research mission. However, because 
of a variety of social and economic conditions in service and academia, 
clinical researchers must reconsider their mission. It is suggested here that 
the research mission must have a direct impact on patient care and prioritize 
the involvement of staff nurses in the process of research utilization as well 
as involve the CNS. This paper provides one example of how a clinical 
researcher is developing a research mission which emphasized research 
utilization to improve patient care, as well as research conduction.

After an initial assessment phase, two primary issues arose as important in 
attaining these goals; helping the staff nurse to feel more comfortable with 
research utilization and helping those already doing research to improve the 
quality and publishability of their research efforts. Three primary activities 
were used to accomplish these goals: (a) the formation of a research committee 
with a predominant staff nurse perspective, (b) an educational program for 
staff nurses which focused on the critique of research and (c) improving 
research skills through individual and group consulting. Many additional 
strategies were implemented however, to address the need for continued culture 
change, developing credibility for nursing research and improving trust and 
communication.

For example, job descriptions were rewritten to include a clear statement of 
research utilization competencies at all clinical ladder levels. Research 
related policies and procedures were revised and rewritten. A position was 
created for a research assistant, to work 1:1 with nurses on issues such as 
library searches, developing coding dictionaries, managing data and data 
analysis. A yearly research award of $1000 was established by nursing 
administration to encourage research focused on our care priorities.

The position is now clearly established and a core group of nurses educated in 
the basics of research. The primary challenge now is to ensure that practicing 
nurses apply their knowledge to improve care. This will be accomplished 
through several mechanisms, i.e., formal and informal education and activities 
by the research committee, the quality improvement council and the practice 
council. Several of these strategies will be reviewed.


Focusing of Quality Patient Care: Contributions From Research

Deborah S. Mobley

Until recently continuous improvement and research have been seen as mutually 
exclusive. Now in the era of rightsizing, reorganization and reengineering all 
efforts must compliment and challenge one another. This is particularly 
significant in an environment that gives all the appearances of organized 
chaos. The continuous improvement process seeks to provide mechanisms that 
guide and support the mission and values of the Medical College of Virginia 
Hospitals (MCVH) in providing quality patient care, education and research. 
The continuous improvement process at MCVH is in transition as we adapt to the 
current industry movements and JCAHO standards which emphasize 
multidisciplinary team efforts, and collaboration in the provision and 
continuum of patient care. These efforts include the development of clinical 
pathways, emphasis on case management and integration of ambulatory services 
into the continuous improvement process.

Research and continuous improvement have a great deal in common. Qualitative 
and quantitative methods easily compare to the continuous improvement 
methodologies, however a different language is used to describe the methods. 
In addition, the development of action science, a type of qualitative study, 
was developed to study systems, implement solutions, and evaluate results, 
thus bridging the gap between continuous improvement and research.

Since the underlying skills of research and continuous improvement are 
similar, the continuous improvement process has benefitted greatly from a 
strong research focus in the institution. A member of our research team 
attends continuous improvement meetings and advises on a number of topics such 
as data collection methods, measurement, and analysis. Two projects will be 
used as examples in which our research program contributed significantly to 
our efforts. These are (1) the measurement of pain satisfaction and (2) 
assessment of falls.

The future holds great wealth for our patients in the new humanistic paradigm 
which encourages examining processes rather than reductionistic approaches 
which examine the effects of one variable while controlling for many 
variables. As we move toward an integrated practice of continuous improvement 
and research, we will seek to improve our data collection techniques (less 
dependance on retrospective chart review), measurement tool development, and 
data analysis. Today's unthinkable possibilities will become tomorrow's 
solutions as researchers and continuous improvement practitioners continue to 
dialogue and practice collaboratively.

