The Woman's Experience of Preterm Labor Symptoms: A Time of Uncertainty

Judith H. Poole and Marlene C. Mackey

Despite significant advances in perinatal medicine over the past 40 years, the 
incidence of preterm birth remains unchanged. Low birth weight and prematurity 
prevention are major concerns confronting perinatal care providers today. 
Signs and symptoms of preterm labor reported in medical and nursing literature 
establish the diagnosis of preterm labor. However, symptoms reported by women 
admitted to labor and delivery units with a diagnosis of preterm labor are 
more subtle. The purpose of this study was to explore the symptoms identified 
by the woman that preceded the diagnosis of preterm labor.

Forty Caucasian and Afro-American women, age 14-43, of varying educational and 
income backgrounds, participated in intensive tape-recorded interviews during 
their initial hospitalization for the treatment of preterm labor (before 37 
completed weeks gestation). The semi-structured interview guide consisted of 
open-ended questions focused on identifying life experiences occurring in the 
current pregnancy before admission to the hospital. Using qualitative data 
analysis techniques, women's descriptions of their symptoms of preterm labor 
were organized into the following thematic categories: first inklings, symptom 
awareness, symptom management, symptom confusion, and symptom conflict. 
Findings from this study suggest that women identify when "something was 
different" in the pregnancy. After recognizing that "something was different" 
the woman self-manages the symptoms before calling her health care provider or 
entering the health care system. Self-diagnosis and management of these 
symptoms indicate that the woman's perception of a change in her body can be 
significant in identifying potential problem during pregnancy. This study 
emphasizes the need to further explore the value of the woman's ability to 
identify changes within her body that may signal potential pregnancy 
complications.

