Self-Care Agency and Participation in Childbirth Education: Relationships to 
Labor and Delivery

Marcella A. Hart

The purpose of this study was to examine (1) changes in self-care agency and 
prenatal attitude towards childbirth participation after attendance at 
Childbirth Education Classes (CEC); and (2) relationships between self-care 
agency and prenatal attitude towards childbirth participation and the couple's 
evaluation of labor and delivery. Orem's Self-care Deficit Nursing Theory was 
used as the framework for this study.

This was a pre post test correlational survey design with a convenience sample 
of 119 childbirth class couples. The average age of the participants was 30 
years; the majority were Caucasian and college educated and had private 
insurance. The majority of the women were primiparas. Tools measuring 
Self-care Agency (ASA Scale) and Prenatal Attitude Towards Childbirth 
Participation (PATCP) scale were given pre and post childbirth classes. Three 
instruments measuring perceptions of labor and delivery were administered post 
delivery. Descriptive statistics, t tests, and Pearson's correlations were 
used to analyze the date. Analysis showed that self-care agency scores of the 
labor partners were significantly increased after completion of childbirth 
classes giving some support to Orem's theory. The PATCP scores were 
significantly increased for both moms and partners indicating that childbirth 
classes increase couples perception of their ability to have some control in 
labor and delivery. Self-care agency scores for the women were significantly 
correlated with labor agency scores; all results were significant with p<.05.

Study results lend support to Orem's theory and suggest that nurses should 
assess a woman's self-care agency as a way to develop interventions to help 
women better cope with labor. Also the significant increase in the PATCP 
scores indicate childbirth classes do give couples the feeling they have some 
control in labor. Further research is needed into effect of epidurals and 
labor and delivery support on childbirth participation. Increasing the 
understanding of couple's perception of childbirth can help childbirth 
educators in designing and implementing classes to better help pregnant 
couples cope with labor and delivery.

