Postpartum Sleep and Assumption of Early Maternal Tasks

Margaret J. Dick, Marilyn L. Evans, Deborah R. Shields, Deborah M. Shook, and 
Mary Beth S. Smith

Rubin's theory of "Puerperal Change" uses the concepts of "taking-in" and 
"taking-hold" to describe the predictable psychological and behavioral 
reactions new mothers experience during the postpartum period. Taking-in is 
characterized by dependent behaviors and concerns and lasts for the first two 
to three postpartum days. Taking-hold is characterized by autonomous behaviors 
and concerns and usually lasts about 10 days; education is best done during 
this phase. Sleep is an essential component of the taking-in phase and is 
vital to the mother's recovery from labor and delivery. The purpose of this 
descriptive correlational study was to examine the relationship of sleep in 
the early postpartum period (hospital setting) to the new mother's progression 
through the phases of taking-in and taking-hold. Taking-in and taking-hold 
were measured with the Martell Postpartum Questionnaire (1984). Sleep 
disturbance and effectiveness were measured with the Visual Analog Sleep Scale 
developed by Verran and Snyder-Halpern (1987). A convenience sample of 120 
women who had normal spontaneous vaginal deliveries between the hours of 6am 
and 5pm were selected for the study. The subjects included both primiparas and 
multiparas. The sample was drawn, from the hospitals in the Southeast. The 
Postpartum Questionnaire was administered on the evening of delivery and on 
the following two mornings, along with the Sleep Scale. A two-tailed test of 
significance with alpha set at 0.05 was used in all study comparisons. Both 
taking-in (X=28.7) and taking-hold (X=26.6) were present on the evening of 
delivery. Paired t-tests indicated a significant decrease in taking-in 
(t=3.23, p=.00)and a significant increase in taking-hold (t=-3.64, p=.00) 
between the evening of delivery and the first morning. Sleep disturbance was 
high on the first night (X=54). There were no significant correlations (r=.15) 
between sleep effectiveness and changes in taking-in scores, or between sleep 
effectiveness and changes in taking-hold (r=.06). Similar correlations were 
found between sleep disturbance and changes in taking-in and taking-hold. 
These findings support Rubin's theory that taking-in decreases and taking-hold 
increases with time. These changes seem to occur despite high levels of sleep 
disturbance. However, Rubin's time frames were not supported; both taking-in 
and taking-hold were equally evident on the evening of delivery. Thus it 
appears that women may be more open to learning about themselves and their 
infants in the early postpartum period than Rubin's theory indicates. In light 
of early discharge patterns, it is important to facilitate periods of 
undisturbed sleep in order to enhance receptiveness to learning.

