Postpartal Women's Perceptions of Nursing Care Quality and Value

Dana S. Cunningham and June H. Larrabee

Quality is a major focus in the provision of health care. Larrabee's wholistic 
model of quality proposes that value is related to quality. Because the 
majority of patient contact and care is through nurses, ensuring nursing care 
quality is vital for overall patient well being. Numerous studies have been 
conducted on nursing care quality. However, there is limited research 
pertaining to postpartal nursing care quality and the nursing care behaviors 
that women most value. The purpose of this descriptive study was to 
investigate postpartal womens' perceptions of quality and value of nursing 
care.

A convenience sample of 54 women from a combined mother-baby unit in a 
mid-sized hospital in west Tennessee participated in the study. The sample was 
predominately white (80%), married (65%), worked outside the home (52%), 
reported good or excellent health (94%), and had completed high school (87%).

Quality was operationalized as patient-perceived quality and measured using 
the postpartal subscale of Littlefield's Patient Participation and 
Satisfaction Questionnaire (PPSQ) with a five-point Likert scale in which 
"very satisfied" = "1". Value was operationalized as patient-perceived value 
and measured using a researcher-constructed instrument, the Importance Scale. 
This scale repeated the stems for items in the PPSQ's postpartal subscale but 
asked patients to rate the importance of each item using a five-point Likert 
response scale in which "very important" = "1". Cronbach's alpha for the 
postpartal satisfaction subscale was .93 and for the Importance Scale was .91. 
Demographic data included age, race, marital status, number of pregnancies, 
number of live births, type of delivery, employment outside the home, general 
health status, education, and income.

Results for the total scale scores indicated a very high level of patient- 
perceived quality (X=1.2+.5) for combined mother-baby postpartal care. One 
hundred percent of the participants reported being "very satisfied" with two 
aspects of care: 1) the chance to be with and care for the baby when wanted; 
and 2) wishes were taken into consideration with regard to time with the baby. 
Both of these aspects of care were rated as "very important" by 100% of the 
participants. Although the total scale scores also indicated a very high level 
of patient-perceived importance (X=1.1+.3), results indicated that postpartal 
women do value certain nursing care behaviors over others. Further research is 
needed to investigate the relationship between patient-perceived quality and 
patient-perceived value in postpartal women.

The findings suggest that postpartal nurses should focus quality improvement 
efforts on those aspects of care which women value most highly and are least 
satisfied. This strategy should make efficient use of hospital resources while 
improving patient care and patient satisfaction.

