Developement and Psychometric Evaluation of the Perceived Environmental 
Uncertainty in Hospitals Scale

Jeanne Salyer

The purpose of this study was to evaluate construct validity and reliability 
of the Perceived Environmental Uncertainty in Hospitals Scale (PEU-H). The 
instrument was developed to measure the degree of perceived unceriainty 
experienced by hospital staaf registered nurses (RNs). Five attributes of the 
environment contribute to perceptions of uncertainty and guided the item 
development process: (1) environmental dynamism, (2) environmental complexity, 
(3) environmental dominance, (4) need for information, and (5S) confidence in 
decision-making. Items were developed with the assistance of RNs in 
medical-surgical, pediatric, and obstetric areas and were critiqued by a 
expert in organizational theory and research. This process ensured that items 
represented attributes of the environment contributing to uncertainty and were 
consistent with conceptual definitions in the literature. Each of the 15 items 
was rated on a scale reflecting the level of agreement with the statement 
(1=strong agreement; 6=strong disagreement). A pilot test of the PEU-H 
conducted on a convenience sample of RNs (N=38) working in medical-surgical, 
critical care, pediatric, psychiatric, rehabilitation, and obstetric areas of 
one medical center and two community hospitals revealed that items were 
readable and clearly written, directions for completion were specific, and 
time for completion of the instrument ranged from 5 to 8 minutes. Item 
response frequency analysis revealed that the full range of response options 
had been selected on all items. Cronbach's alpha for the 15-item scale was 
.78.

A second phase of instrument testing was conducted to further assess internal 
consistency reliability, conduct an item analysis based on data from at least 
5 subjects per item, eliminate items, and examine construct validity. A survey 
questionnaire was distributed to a random sample of 135 staff RNs working in 
medical-surgical and pediatric areas of a university medical center. Seventy 
percent (n=95) of the questionnaires were returns. The sample was 91.6% 
female. Forty-five percent of the subjects were under 30 years of age and 
13.7% were over 45. Fifty-one percent had a baccalaureate degree in nursing. 
Sixty-seven percent reported having three or more years of nursing experience.

When each of the 15 items was examined using item-total and inter-item 
correlation statistics, four items were eliminated because of low inter-item 
and item-total correlations. On the 11 remaining items, item-total 
correlations were consistently > .40. Fifty-one percent of the inter-item 
correlations were > .30. Internal consistency reliability (Cronbach's alpha) 
of the 11-item scale was .83, which is acceptable for a new scale.

Principal components factor analysis (PCA) was performed on the 11-item scale. 
The scree test criterion indicated one substantial factor; however, using 
Kaiser's criterion of considering all unrotated factors with eigenvalues > 1.0 
resulted in two factors that accounted for 50.5% of the variace. A two-factor 
solution was explored using PCA with oblimin rotation. This solution revealed 
one item with a ambiguous loading; hence the one-factor solution was 
considered more interpretable. All factor loadings on the one-factor solution 
were > .50. The eigenvalue for the factor was 4.10 and 37.3% of the variace 
was explained.

Three limitations of the 11-item version were noted. First, items measuring 
confidence in decision making and environmental doninance were eliminated 
because of low item-total and inter-item correlations. Second, the high 
inter-item correlation between items measuring the impact of frequent 
admissions and discharges and frequent transfers on/off the unit indicates 
redundancy. Third, the instrument was tested only with RNs working in 
medical-surgical and pediatric areas of an academic medical center. Further 
testing of a revised instrument using a heterogeneous sample from multiple 
sites is necessary to determine reliability and validity of the PEU-H.

