Revision and Testing of an Instrument to Measure Reciprocity in the Dyadic 
Caregiving Relationship
Maranah A. Sauter 

Reciprocity within the dyadic caregiving relationship represents a pattern of 
exchange between caregiver and elder care receiver. This pattern of exchange 
involves give and take which largely determines relationship quality and 
satisfaction. The purpose of this study was to revise and pilot test an 
instrument to measure reciprocity in the dyadic caregiving relationship.

The Caregiver Reciprocity Scale was originally developed by Carruth (1993) to 
measure caregiver reciprocity in adult children caring for elderly parents. 
Conceptually based within a framework of social exchange theory and equity 
theory, The Caregiver Reciprocity Scale consists of a 22 item Likert scale 
measuring the adult child caregiver's perception of reciprocity in the 
caregiving relationship. Because reciprocity involves exchange between 
caregiver and care receiver, the need for an instrument to measure reciprocity 
from the perceptions of both dyad members was recognized.

Revision of the Caregiver Reciprocity Scale followed the theoretical 
distinction between dimensions of reciprocity established through factor 
analysis during the process of instrument development. Dimensions included (a) 
warmth and regard, (b) intrinsic rewards of giving, (c) love and affection, 
and (d) balance within family caregiving. Items were revised to reflect 
perceptions of reciprocity from either member of the caregiving dyad. Items 
judged to be restricted to the present and therefore non-applicable to 
dependent elderly care receivers were revised to permit reflection and 
incorporation of past experiences or perceptions. Refinement of items and 
content validity were established by a panel of experts in caregiving 
research, gerontology, and instrumentation.

The revised instrument was pilot tested with 40 members of caregiving dyads. 
In the pilot study, the revised instrument was utilized as an interview 
schedule with dependent elderly care receivers and their family caregivers to 
assess quality of the caregiving relationship. Internal consistency 
reliability estimates (Cronbach1s alpha) for each dimension of the instrument 
were acceptable with an overall reliability of .82. The revised instrument is 
being tested currently in a larger study of determinants of quality of the 
care relationship with a sample 100 caregiving dyads.

