Measuring Anxiety in Critically Ill Patients

JoAnne Herman and Elizabeth Shaw

Measurement of self-report cognitive and affective data from critically ill 
subjects can be very difficult. However, the search for solutions to this 
challenge is necessary because knowledge about the relationships among 
cognitive, affective, and physiological functioning of critically ill patients 
is vital for the development of a theoretical base for critical care nursing 
practice. Traditional instruments pose particular problems because of their 
high cognitive demand. The visual analogue scale (VAS) requires less cognitive 
concentration and is easier and quicker to complete than most instruments. 
Therefore, the purpose of this study was to establish validity for a VAS to 
measure anxiety in critically ill patients.
Concurrent validity was tested by comparing subject scores on two instruments: 
Speilberger State Anxiety Inventory (SAI) and a researcher generated Visual 
Analogue Scale (VAS). Construct validity was tested by comparing subject 
scores for those on ventilators and those not. It was hypothesized that 
subjects on ventilators would have higher anxiety than subjects who were not 
on ventilators.

The sample consisted of 53 subjects about evenly divided between women (24) 
and men (29). The mean age was 52 years with a range of 20-77. The majority of 
subjects had a high school education and were Caucasian, married, and retired. 
Twenty-four of the subjects were on a ventilator and 29 were not. After 
informed consent was obtained, subject's blood pressure and pulse were 
recorded. Then subjects completed the VAS and SAI. The questionnaires were 
completed in a randomly assigned order.

The mean VAS score for anxiety was 25 with a sd of 31 and a range of 0-100. 
The mean SAI score was 40 with a standard deviation of 14 and a range of 
20-79. The Pearson correlation between the VAS and SAI was .81. There were no 
significant correlations between systolic blood pressure, diastolic blood 
pressure, pulse and either the VAS or the SAI. T-test analysis of VAS scores 
between the ventilator group and the non-ventilator group revealed a 
statistically significant difference. Subjects in the ventilator group scored 
significantly higher (33) than non-ventilator subjects (19). Findings from 
this study establish preliminary validity for the VAS to measure anxiety in 
critically ill patients.

