Concurrent Validity for a Tool to Measure Anxiety in Laboring Women

Elizabeth J. Shaw

Specific Aims: During the past decade a number of interdisciplinary efforts 
have focused on the role of higher-order mental processes in health and 
disease. Psycho-biological research has evolved from superficial correlational 
analyses to a recognition of the indivisible nature of cognitive, affective, 
and biological processes. Consistent with this paradigm shift, a new category 
of risk has evolved as a contributing variable in poor perinatal outcomes: 
stress, both physical and psychosocial (Institute of Medicine, 1985). Maternal 
anxiety and mood disturbances have now been implicated as etiological 
antecedents to poor perinatal outcomes. Interventions to mediate the maternal 
stress response are also being redefined. Anecdotal evidence of the 
effectiveness of self-regulation techniques such as relaxation, hypnosis, and 
biofeedback to reduce anxiety is beginning to accumulate in the nursing 
literature. However, to test hypotheses that self-regulatory and relaxation 
therapies facilitate psychological and physiological stress reduction, the 
critical intervening variable of anxiety must be measured. Therefore, the 
purpose of this study was to establish concurrent validity for a tool to 
measure anxiety in laboring women. As the VAS was hypothesized as an ideal 
instrument for use in laboring women, concurrent validity of the VAS was 
sought through the correlation with a criterion instrument well established in 
clinical research as a reliable measure of anxiety (SAI).

Subjects: The women participating in this study (N=51) were 14 to 42 years old 
with a mean age of 23.7 years. The majority of the women were African-American 
(74.5%). The remaining women were Caucasian, Asian, and Hispanic.

Setting: The study was conducted in the labor and delivery unit of a large 
teaching hospital in a Southeastern metropolitan city.

Instruments: Two instrments were used in this correlational study: The State 
Anxiety Inventory and the anxiety visual analogue scale (VAS).

Procedure: The conduct of this study was approved by the institutional review 
board of the medical cater. Data were collected January-June, 1994. 
Demographic, obstetrical, labor, and delivery data were collected by patient 
interview and medical chart review. Laboring women were then asked to rate the 
intensity of their anxiety at that moment on the VAS and fill out the SAI 
using a standardized instructional protocol. The order in which the 
instruments were completed was randomly assigned to control for testing 
sensitization.

Results: A strong positive correlation was found between the SAI and VAS 
(0.72; p<.0001). Fifty perceet of the variance in scores on the VAS can be 
explained by the variance in SAI scores.

Implications: This study provides perinatal researchers focusing on the 
cognitive and emotive processes underlying poor perinatal outcomes with the 
validation of a reliable measure of anxiety easy to use in the clinical 
setting. Rigor in the assessment of metric properties of instruments and 
methods, and the selection and use of tools with evidence of good reliability 
and validity, will allow for the placement of a high level of confidence in 
the findings and interpretations of nursing research (Strickland & Waltz, 
1986).

