Meta-Synthesis: A Qualitative Method to Develop a Caring Model for Nursing

Gwen Sherwood

Aim: The accumulation of qualitative studies defining caring from the client's 
perspective created a need to synthesize the results for advancement of 
nurses' caring theory. Meta-synthesis was the method used to aggregate 
findings of nurses' caring as described by clients from the existing 
qualitative studies to derive more substantive interpretations than available 
from single studies. The recovery and synthesis of the essential patterns and 
common themes from multiple studies offers refinement of the current state of 
caring knowledge leading to an inductively derived model.

Purpose: The purpose of this study was to identify the extant qualitative 
nursing research literature investigating caring from the perspective of the 
client to complete a meta-synthesis of the findings.

Method: The goals of meta-synthesis are comparable to those for meta-analysis 
used for qualitative studies: to integrate, synthesize and organize research 
results into coherent patterns which can be more easily applied to clinical 
practice. Data were merged from across studies into a common data pool and 
studied. Through analysis and synthesis, data were collapsed into essential 
patterns with explanatory themes. The final step was to express the synthesis 
with a composite description by narrating patterns and/or themes to explain 
what is taking place.

Findings: The 16 qualitative studies conducted between 1975 and 1993 comprised 
the data pool with an aggregate of 353 respondents. Using meta-synthesis to 
aggregate the findings from 16 qualitative studies on nurses' caring from the 
perspective of patients, an operational model of nurses' caring emerged. The 
patterns and themes uncovered describe caring within the context, content, and 
process of caring acted upon by the attributes and knowledge of the nurse 
leading to therapeutic outcomes. The operational model provides the structure 
to formulate research into the therapeutics of caring, advancing nursing 
theory. Caring is built on a model of interaction based on context, content 
and process for goal-directed, therapeutic outcomes, presumed to be healing. 
The concerned interactive presence of the nurse offers vigilance and 
surveillance to anticipate the unique physical and mental needs of each 
client, creating trust that the nurse is "right on top of things." Based on 
knowing and being with, belief in the client enables a hope-filled attitude 
promoting and understanding the personal meaning of the health care experience 
to the client.

