The Relationship Between Patterns of Breastfeeding in the First Three Days of 
Life and Jaundice Levels in Normal Newborns

Diane B. Boyer and E. Fowles

A majority of previous studies have found more jaundice in breast-fed than 
bottle-fed babies in the first 72 hours of life (HOL). However, a review 
indicates that natural breastfeeding (defined as feeding within the first 
postnatal hour, a frequency of feeding of at least 9-12 times/day, and no 
artificial supplementation) was not being investigated. Concern over jaundice 
even in apparently healthy term newborns' sometimes leads to the interruption 
of breastfeeding during this critical early period, thus jeopardizing 
breastfeeding success. The purpose of this study was to investigate the 
relationship between patterns of breastfeeding in the first 72 HOL and 
jaundice levels at 48 and 12 HOL. Research questions included: Is there a 
relationship between jaundice levels at 48 and 72 HOL and a) time of initial 
breastfeeding; b) frequency of feedings; c) cumulative total minutes of 
breastfeeding; d) supplementation vs. non-supplementation. The sample 
consisted of 56 normal white mothers and newborns. 10 from a tertiary care 
center, 18 from a community hospital and 28 from a home birth practice, who 
gave informed consent for the study. Independent variables were measured by 
chart review and self-report by mothers. The dependent variable, jaundice 
level, was measured by transcutaneous determination of jaundice by the 
Minolta/Air Shields Jaundice Meter within the first 12 HOL and at 48 and 72 
HOL. A subset of the sample also had serum bilirubin determinations done at 
the same time blood was drawn for PKU testing. Data are being analyzed by 
calculation of correlation coefficient, Chi-square analysis or fisher's exact 
test as appropriate to answer the research questions. Determining a pattern of 
feeding which will result in decreased jaundice will promote successful 
breastfeeding while decreasing health care costs associated with the diagnosis 
and treatment of jaundice in newborns.

