The Relationship Between Pain Disclosure and Perceived Confirmation in the 
Experience of Postoperative Clients

Patricia Louise Muar

The purpose of this study was to investigate the possible relationship between 
client disclosure of postoperative incisional pain to nursing caregivers and 
client perception of caregiver response to previous pain disclosure. The 
question posed by the study was asked as follows: Does perception of 
confirmation in caregiver response to previous pain disclosure provide for 
significantly better classification of clients into groups than does the 
combination of perceived pain intensity, perceived distress from pain, client 
control of analgesic medication, and trait anxiety?

The theoretical framework for this investigation was drawn from King's Theory 
for Nursing and Siebold's Theory of Confirmation in Interpersonal 
Communication. Data was collected from 60 adults age 22 to 69 years who were 
hospitalized for elective surgery requiring a hospital stay of at least 48 
hours. Forty participants were male and 20 female. Thirty-two percent reported 
less than 12 years of formal education. Sixty-two percent were married. 
Variables controlled in the process of sample selection included age, 
ethnicity, personal history of chronic pain and experience with a family 
member having chronic pain.

Participants were interviewed preoperatively including completion of the 
State/Trait Anxiety Inventory and instruction in the use of a visual analogue 
scale. On the evening of their first postoperative day, participants were 
asked to describe their experience the first time they got out of bed after 
surgery. They were asked to describe perceived pain intensity and distress 
using a 10 cm visual analogue scale. They were asked whether they told the 
caregiver that they were experiencing pain. Those who answered affirmatively 
were asked to use a visual analogue scale to describe the amount of distress 
communicated to the caregiver. All participants completed the Perceived 
Confirmation Scale to describe how caregivers made them feel when they talked 
about their pain.

Ten of 60 participants (16.6%) did not disclose the presence of pain to the 
caregiver. Discriminant function analysis showed a 10% improvement in correct 
classification of the sample into disclosure or nondisclosure groups when 
confirmation scores were included in the analysis. Participant gender was not 
controlled in sample selection. A t-test for independent samples showed 
significant differences in expressed distress scores by gender. Mean expressed 
distress scores for females were greater than those for males.

Participants who reported experiencing less distress than disclosed to the 
caregiver had significantly lower mean confirmation scores than those who 
reported the same or more distress (F=3.75, p=.03). Females were more likely 
to disclose less distress to the caregiver than they reported experiencing 
(chisq= 11.69, p=.003). Males were more likely to disclose the same amount of 
distress they reported.

The study findings suggest that perception of confirmation in caregiver 
response to previous pain disclosure is related to disclosure of pain to 
caregivers. The number of females in the sample was quite small, but the 
results also suggest that gender may be a mediating factor in this 
relationship. The relationship between pain disclosure and confirmation merits 
further study. Caregivers who are open to patient reports of pain and 
accepting of their validity may encourage accurate reporting of the presence 
and intensity of pain especially from female clients.

