Cognitive-Behavioral Appraoches for Postoperative Pain Management with Adults: 
A Meta-Analysis

Joanne M. Laframboise

Non-pharmacological interventions have been recommended for use with surgical 
patients as adjuvant therapies along with narcotic analgesia to relieve acute 
postoperative pain. The efficacy of cognitive-behavioral approaches for 
postoperative pain management has been examined empirically; however, the 
types of surgical patient groups sampled, cognitive-behavioral approaches 
examined, implementation procedures used, and outcome variables measured to 
determine treatment effects varied considerably, making it difficult to make 
inferences about the efficacy of these approaches. The specific aim of this 
study was to obtain published experimental studies from the past 15 years in 
which the cognitive-behavioral appraoches of simple relaxation, music therapy, 
and pleasant imagery were examined. Twelve "subject-studies" met the inclusion 
criteria and comprised the sample for this meta-analytic review. Methodologic 
and substantiative study characteristics (independent variables) wer coded 
using a published prototype tool. Seven outcome measures, including self-
report and behavioral responses, were used to measure treatment effects on 
postoperative pain (dependent variable). A total of twenty-eight individual 
effect sizes were calculated. Weighted, mean effect sizes for the seven 
outcome measures ranged from -0.36 to -1.08 (a negative direction for effect 
indicated a favorable outcome for the treatment group). From a clinical 
perspective, these data can be interpreted as subjects in an experimental 
group experienced, on average, a 27% reduction in postoperative pain when 
compared with 71% of subjects in the control group. Results from this 
quantitative review support the recommendations put forth by the Agency for 
Health Care Policy and Research, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 
in the 1992 publication, Clinical Practice Guideline, Acute Pain Management: 
Operative or Medical Procedures and Trauma.

