Enhancing Growth in Children

Elizabeth Reifsnider

The specific aim of the study was to investigate the effects of a community 
health nursing intervention on children with growth delay enrolled in WIC in 
central Texas. Hypotheses concerning growth quotients for weight, length, 
daily intake of calories and protein, parent-child interaction, home 
environment, community life skills and perceived stress of the mother were 
tested in a pre-test, post-test design with a sample of 39 children with 
growth delay, randomly assigned to control or experimental groups. The 
children were identified in WIC clinics in local health departments as being 
growth delayed. Their families were contacted by the researcher and invited to 
participate in a study on children's growth, but the families were not 
informed as to which group their child bad been assigned.
The instruments used were: a balance-beam infant scale, an infant length 
board, a 24-hour diet recall and a four-day prospective food record, the Home 
Observation for Measurement of the Environment (HOME) Inventory, Community 
Life Skills Scale (CLSS), Perceived Stress Scale (PSS) and the Infant and 
Toddler Temperament Scale/Questionnaire. Following preliminary data collection 
for the entire sample, a nursing intervention was administered to the 
experimental group during home visits. The intervention included education on 
nutrition, parenting and community life skills.

Posttest data were collected on the two groups by a research assistant blind 
to group assignment. The data was analyzed using independent t-tests for the 
growth quotients for weight and height, and dependent t-tests for the data on 
daily intake of calories and protein, and a MANOVA for the HOME, CLSS and PSS. 
Quantitative findings, (at p<.05) indicated positive changes in the 
experimental group's weight growth quotient, diet, home environment, and 
maternal perceived stress. For this presentation, the focus will be on the 
data concerning weight and dietary intake. This research has demonstrated that 
community health nurses through use of targeted interventions on parenting and 
nutrition education may assist parents in ameliorating the effects of growth 
delay on their children.

