Weight-Related Distress After Childbirth

Lorraine O. Walker and Luci B. Johnson

Following recent increases in how much weight women are advised to gain during 
pregnancy, concern exists that some women may become overweight following 
childbirth. At present, experts estimate the U.S. women retain an average of 
2.2 lb (1 kg) as a result of childbearing. This modest average gain, however, 
masks great variability in gains, with some women having substantial gains 
after childbirth. Moreover, increasingly precise scientific measurement of 
weight gain related to childbearing fails to take into account an additional 
dimension: how women psychologically experience such weight gain. As a result, 
the aim of this paper is to describe the phenomenon of weight-related distress 
after childbirth and the characteristics of women who experience such 
distress.

As part of a larger postpartum survey, women were asked to give brief, 
open-ended descriptions of their feelings about their current weight. The 
survey was conducted 2.5 to 6 months after women had given birth. Of 244 women 
who participated in the survey, 239 provided usable statements regarding their 
weight. Two of these were omitted because of incomplete data or failing to 
meet study criteria for inclusion. Women's weight-related statements were 
coded into 6 categories which ranged from seeing themselves as underweight to 
experiencing weight-related distress. Such distress was indicated by comments 
that mentioned loss of self-esteem, feeling awful about current weight, or 
other comments that indicated more than mild dissatisfaction with weight. 
Approximately 10% of women were classified as experiencing weight-related 
distress.

Analyses are underway to identify sociodemographic and anthropometric 
characteristics of women who experienced weight-related distress. These will 
be presented with an eye to identifying profile of women likely to experience 
weight-related distress. Overall, women who experience weight-related distress 
had higher weight gains during pregnancy, higher body image dissatisfaction at 
postpartum, and higher amounts of postpartum weight gain. Other factors such 
as infant birth weight and maternal age were not associated with 
weight-related distress.

