Seeking Solace Through Eating

Sheryl S. Russell

The search to unravel the complex phenomenon of obesity has been pursued for 
centuries. Theoretical postulations regarding the etiology of obesity and 
subsequent management strategies are numerous and complex. Despite decades of 
clinical application, the rising prevalence of obesity remains essentially 
unchanged. Clearly it is time to consider a new perspective.

A grounded theory design provided the opportunity to explore this phenomenon 
in a new light. Strauss and Corbin's (1990), approach to grounded theory 
methodology was utilized to answer the question, "What are the social 
processes involved in eating and obesity?" Primary, purposive, network, sample 
selection utilizing a snowball technique was employed to identify potential 
study participants. Study participants were obese, adult, American, Caucasian 
women between the ages of 21 and 55 who identified food issues as problematic. 
Obesity was defined as a BMI (body mass index) of greater than or equal to 
27.3. The investigation of obesity and the experience of eating was conducted 
through unstructured interviews. Participants were asked one initial question, 
"Tell me about a recent eating experience that was problematic for you." 
Interviews were audio taped and transcribed. Consistent with Strauss and 
Corbin (1990), sample selection continued until saturation was achieved and no 
new themes emerged. The transcripts were analyzed and the core category was 
identified as eating and reflected the phenomenon of central concern and most 
frequent occurrence in the data. The theory of seeking solace emerged as a 
process of the experience of eating and obesity in these women.

This study attempts to understand the phenomenon of eating in adult, obese, 
American, Caucasian women from the perspective of the reality of the women who 
experience it. The resulting theory of seeking solace through eating emerged 
from the context of the social process in which it was embedded. Embracing 
this new understandihg of eating and obesity, realistic strategies may be 
designed to promote health and reduce the associated morbidity and mortality. 
Nursing interfaces with people at all phases of the life cycle and, therefore, 
is in a unique position to influence this continued health problem.

