Examining the Relationship Between Nonpurge Binge Eating Severity and Weight 
in Women Using the Set Point Theory

Gayle M. Timmerman

The purpose of this presentation is to examine the relationship between 
nonpurge binge eating severity and weight in women using the set point theory 
as the conceptual framework. Selected findings from a research study with a 
voluntary sample of nonpurge binge eating women from varying age groups will 
be used to provide a better understanding of how the set point theory can be 
used to explain the relationship of nonpurge binge eating and weight.

Nonpurge binge eating is the uncontrolled eating of a large amount of food in 
a specific period of time without compensatory purging behaviors 
characteristic of bulimia nervosa. Although binge eating is a prevalent 
problem in the obese population (20-50%), the relationship between binge 
eating and degree of obesity has not been adequately explored.

According to the set point theory of energy regulation, weight is regulated 
within the parameters of a specific level or set point. Stability is 
maintained by balancing energy intake with energy expenditure. However, the 
increased metabolic rate associated with increased energy intake appears to be 
temporary. Past research findings indicate that the set point can become 
elevated with prolonged overfeeding of high fat diets. Obesity is thought to 
represent the regulation of weight at an elevated set point.

Based on the set point theory, a model for binge-induced obesity was 
hypothesized for this study: 1) when binge episodes become a frequent, regular 
pattern, the body's set point would become elevated; and 2) a long history of 
binge eating would contribute to degree of obesity by progressively elevating 
the set point.

In this study, binge eating severity was measured by adding the calorie intake 
during each binge episode (> 1,000 kcal/episode) as recorded in food diaries 
over 28 days. Degree of obesity was measured by percent of body fat and body 
mass index (BMI). Binge eating severity had a low, but significant association 
with BMI and was not significantly related to percent of body fat. The low 
correlations failed to support the proposed model for binge-induced obesity.

The large fluctuations in binge eating patterns may explain the low 
correlations between binge eating severity and degree of obesity. The 
variability in binge frequency and amount consumed during binges over time 
contradicts the assumption that binge episodes become frequent and regular 
enough to elevate the set point. Thus, the binge-induced model for obesity may 
only hold true for the subset of binge eaters with a progressive increase in 
binge eating severity over time. Another possible explanation may be that 
amount of fat consumed during binges, rather than the amount of calories, has 
a stronger relationship to degree of obesity.

