Intrinsic Factors Influencing Health Promotion in Elderly African-American 
Women

Rachel Taylor

The alm of this predictive correlational study was to examine the value of 
health self-determinism, health promotion, and selected demographic variables 
as predictors of perceived health status in elderly African-American women. 
The research questions for this study were: (1) Is there a significant 
predictive relationship between Health-Promoting Lifestyle Profile (HPLP) 
scores and Health Self-Determinism Index (HSDI) scores with Current Health 
Status (CHS) scores in elderly African-American women? (2) What are the 
effects of demographic variables of age, last occupation, income, education, 
and Health-Promoting Lifestyle (HPLP) subscales on the Current Health Scale 
(CHS) scores in elderly Africa-American women?

A second aim was to qualitatively explore what being healthy meant to these 
women and what they considered important about their health. A convenience 
sample of 100 African-American women (65-89 years of age) completed the 
Health-Promoting Lifestyle Profile (HPLP), the Health Self-Determinism Index 
(HSDI), and the Current Health Scale (CHS). The data were analyzed using 
descriptive statistics, correlational analysis, and multiple regression. 
Findings revealed statistically significant linear relationships between 
health promotion and health self-determinism (r=.272; p=0.01), between health 
self-determinism and perceived health status (r=.268; p=.01), and between 
health promotion and perceived health status (r=.234; p=.02). Regression 
analysis showed health self-determinism as measured by the HSDI to be a 
significant predictor of perceived health status as measured by the CHS 
(t=2.55; p=.0123). Stepwise regression showed a statistically significant 
predictive relationship among income, self-actualization, and interpesonal 
support with perceived health status (F=6.263; p=.0021). Health 
conceptualization was examined with the question: "What is it for you to be 
healthy?" Five major themes emerged from the responses to this question and 
were analyzed for congruence with the four dimensions of health conceptualized 
by Smith (1981). The major themes were mental and physical well-being, absence 
of pain or disability, personal responsibillty for health and illness, 
spiritual blessing, and happiness with the current state of health. Health 
value was examined with the question: "Is your health important to you? Why?" 
Three categories which emerged were desire for independence, desire for long 
life and better quality of life, and joy in living. The implications of the 
study derived from the findings support the premise that the relationship 
between health promotion, health self-determinism and perceived health status 
is multidimensional and that it warrants further exploration of the intrinsic 
factors which impact on health promotion in a older population. The extended 
life span and the acknowledged need for better quality of life to accompany 
the advance in life span justify this concern. It is recommended that nurses 
implement programs which emphasize wellness and health promotion in 
African-American women.

