Intensive Care Outcomes in an Elderly Population

Suzanne S. Prevost

As the incentives of managed care force us to scrutinize expensive 
interventions, we must continually evaluate the outcomes of critical care for 
high risk populations. The elderly are one high risk group that is being seen 
with increasing frequency in intensive care units. Critical care nurses often 
ponder questions related to the appropriateness and potential futility of 
intensive care for the elderly.

Research questions posed in this study were: 1) What are the demographic 
characteristics of elderly patients admitted to an intensive care unit? 2) 
What are the outcomes for the elderly after discharge from intensive care? and 
3) Are there relationships between demographic characteristics and outcomes, 
in a critically ill elderly population?

Methods: In this descriptive, correlational study, we followed 120 patients 
over age 70 who were cared for in an intensive care unit for greater than 36 
hours. The setting was a 16 bed mixed medical-surgical unit in a community 
hospital.

Findings: The mean age was 77.7 years, mean ICU length of stay - 7.6 days, 
mean hospital length of stay - 17.8 days, and mean charges $47,331. 47.5% of 
subjects were discharged to their homes, 16.7% to other hospitals or 
rehabilitation facilities, 10% to nursing homes, and 25% expired prior to 
hospital discharge. Mortality was higher in men (30.6%), than women (23.2%), 
and higher in widowed/single (32.8%) than married (14.6%) subjects. Spearman 
correlations revealed relationships between age and discharge status (p<.0001) 
and ICU length of stay and discharge status (p<.0001). The relationship 
between age and charges was not significant.

Implications: Although the mortality rate and charges were high, overall 
discharge outcomes were positive, consistent with previous studies which have 
denounced the use of age as a criterion for ICU bed allocation. 
Recommendations for future research include expansion of the study to more 
than one institution and a broader ethnic representation; and investigation of 
the influence of marital status on mortality in this population.

