Effectiveness of Pattern-Specific Nursing Interventions in Hypoxia-Related 
Acute Confusional States in Older Patients

V. Neelon, N. Ng'andu, J. Miller, J. Carlson, M. Belyea, D. Baily, and M. 
Champagne

INTRODUCTION: Acute confusion or delirium is a transient syndrome 
characterized primarily by abnormalities in attention and cognition, but 
disordered psychomotor behavior, sleep-wake disturbances, and autonomic 
nervous system disturbances are not uncommon (Engel & Romano, 1959; Lipowski, 
1990). Acute confusion is common in hospitalized elderly, particularly 
patients with underlying chronic cognitive impairnent (Chisholm et al., 1982; 
Foreman, 1989; Neelon et al., 1989; Williams et al., 1985). Patients who 
develop acute confusional states have high morbidity and mortallty, both 
during hospitalization and after discharge (Francis & Kapoor, 1992; Gillick et 
al. 1982; Levkoff et al., 1992). Because acute confusion has multiple causes 
and varied patterns of clinical manifestations, we hypothesized that early 
identification and treatment of patients using pattern-specific interventions 
would be more effective than usual care (Neelon et al., 1992). We report in 
this paper the effects of nurse-initiated, pattern-specific protocols among 
patients treated for hypoxia-related acute confusion.

METHODS: We used a prospective, repeated measures experimental design to test 
pattern-specific interventions in 225 general medical patients (age 65+) 
assessed at admission for risk factors and presence of acute confusion 
(NEECHAM Confusion Scale score < 25 on a 0-30 scale). We used a RISK-INDICATOR 
SCREEN developed from clinical observation and likelihood ratios of key 
patient variables to classify patients' risk and patterns. Using regression 
analysis, we evaluated the effects of treatment by change in NEECHAM scores 
over the first 24 hours as the key outcome measure.

RESULTS: Of the 175 identified as at risk or confused at admission, 98 
received pattern-specific interventions on the treatment unit, and 77 were 
followed on the usual care unit. Using multiple regression and controlling for 
covariates, interventions showed a positive and significant effect on NEECHAM 
scores (beta= 1.40, p=.02). Using logistic regression to evaluate a clinically 
significant response at 24 hours, the odds of improving 4 points or more in 
NEECHAM score for treated patients were 2.49 (95%CI=1.01, 6.15). Patients who 
responded were more likely to have lower oxygen saturations (p=.001), poorer 
nutritional status (p=.001), and markers of chronic cognitive imparrment 
(p=.03). Those positive for hypoxia-related confusion improved with treatment 
(beta=2.04, p=.01). The precise mechanisms underlying the effects of 
intervention on hypoxic patterned patients are under study, however, analysis 
of NEECHAM items score changes indicate that patients improved both in 
cognitive function (beta=0.38 ,p=.02) and oxygen stability (beta=0.69 ,p=.04). 
These data support our hypotheses that early identification and treatment of 
elderly patients with acute confusion using pattern-specific protocols are 
effective, at least in the initial 24 hours of treatment.

