What is the Child's Role?

Sharon D. Horner

"Who are You?" said the Caterpillar.
Alice replied, rather shyly, "I - I hardly know, sir, just at present - at 
least I know who I was when I got up this morning, but I think I must have 
been changed several times since then."  Lewis Carroll, 1865/1989.

A survey of nursin gliterature reveals that much of the research on families 
addresses parental concerns. There are fewer studies that address the child's 
perspective with the child as the informant. The question addressed in this 
presentation is: Given the range of developmental capabilities, at what point 
is the child considered a valid data source in the research design? The 
answer, in part, depends on the research question. After identifying a 
research question, one must then decide who or what is the best data source 
for answering the question. Because children are situated within families, the 
growing body of literature on family research provides a framework for 
exploring the central question of data source.

In many studies of children, the data source is an adult -- either a teacher, 
a parent, an observer, or other peson with some connection to the child. 
Traditionally family researchers have relied on a single informant for 
information about family phenomena, including child health and illness 
processes. This trend may stem, in part, from positivistic assumptions about 
the need for objectivity to render the research product validity. Based on 
this assumption, the child is not considered an "accurate" source of data, 
because of lack of insight or perspective for interpreting experiences. While 
children may prove to be "weak" sources for historical facts, they are rich 
sources of interpretive insights into thier lived experiences. As nursing 
science techniques have "matured," this positivisitic assumption is 
challenged, and the child is being included as a valid data source in studies 
which strive to uncover the total picture of the child's health and illness 
experiences.

Strengths and weaknesses of research designs using children and/or adults as 
data sources in studies of children's health and illness experiences will be 
discussed. Mechanisms for enhancing data validity will be discussed with 
examples from current research presented.

