Methodology and Children: Overcoming Barriers

Melanie Smith Percy

Traditionally, children have been studied from an adult perspective. A review 
of current literature demonstrated the prevalence of parental reporting in 
research designs focusing on children. Not surprisingly infants, and young 
children are most frequently studied by observation or parental report. As 
children become verbal they are more likely to be directly involved in the 
study as a data source. Visual analog scales, paper and pencil tests, 
observation and interviews are common techniques for verbal children. 
Biological parameters are generally gathered through non-invasive means.

Any research design involving children as the data source must be tailored to 
the child's developmental level. Fine and gross motor co-ordination, activity 
level, expressive and receptive language ability, attention span, and reading 
level are areas of concern when planning research with children. Whether using 
a quantitative or qualitative method developmental issues remain paramount in 
design development. Structuring the research to include a variety of different 
activitieis helps to prevent boredom and maintains the child's interest in the 
research process. Children are frequently intimidated by adult authority 
figures and may be inhibited by one-to-one contact with an adult researcher. A 
group of peers can provide feelings of safety and security for the child who 
is uncomfortable with adults. Group data gathering techniques facilitate 
communication between the child and researcher. The researcher must also be 
aware of the child's physical needs. Conducting the interview in a comfortable 
room, accepting the child's need to move about, or providing snacks are 
necessary adaptations to the research process.

Developmental considerations critical to research design will be discussed. 
Specific examples and techniques appropriate to each age group will be 
delineated. Experience using children's photography, video tapings, and 
drawings in qualitative research projects will be presented.

