The Effect of Respite Care Training on Volunteers' Attitudes, Commitment, 
Self-Esteem, and Knowledge

Kay F. Kiesler and Karen Robinson

Purpose: The purpose of this study was to look at the effects of respite care 
training on attitude toward the mentally impaired, commitment to support a 
caregiver, self-esteem, and knowledge about Alzheimer's disease in volunteers 
attending a one day, seven hour respite training program.

Sample: Thirty-four volunteers were studied.

Methods: Each volunteer completed scales on attitude toward the mentally 
impaired, commitment to support a caregiver, self-esteem, knowledge about 
Alzheimer's disease and demographic data. Descriptive statistics, correlation, 
oneway ANOVA, independent t-test and paired t-test were used to analyze data.

Findings: Data analysis is in process; the following reflects the findings of 
the first 24 subjects. Fifty-eight percent of the sample had family experience 
with caregiving. Knowledge about Alzheimer's disease significantly increased 
after respite training (pre-test M=8, post-test M=9, t=-3.21, P=.004). 
Although the other variables were not significant, examination of mean post-
test scores indicated that the training generally resulted in increased 
knowledge, self-esteem, commitment and more positive attitudes. The only 
attitude not increased with attitude toward urinary incontinence. Male self-
esteem scores (M=45) were higher when compared to female (M=40) self-esteem 
scores (t=2.18, P=.04). Post-training increased age (r=-.42, p<.05) was found 
negatively related to positive self-esteem. Older volunteers had lower self-
esteem scores post-training. Increased knowledge (r=-.52, p<.05) was 
negatively related to positive post-training attitude toward a person who 
wanders. At post-training, the more knowledgeable the volunteer, the worse the 
attitude was toward a person who wanders. This finding may reflect increased 
awareness of the dnager involved in wandering behavior.

Conclusions: These results have implications for nursing. Respite care 
training can be performed in a one day program with positive outcomes. Future 
recruitment efforts for respite care training might meet with more success by 
seeking individuals who have past experience in caregiving. Only by evaluating 
the effectiveness of the training can knowledge be gained about how the 
training impacts the volunteers' self-esteem, attitudes, and/or commitment to 
the caregiver and the mentally impaired.

