Spousal Interactions in Alzheimer's Disease (AD) and Stroke Caregiving: Impact 
on Care Receivers' Health

Lore K. Wright and Joanne V. Hickey

Problem: There is beginning evidence that quantity and quality of interactions 
between caregivers and care receivers impact the health of care receivers. 
However, the extent to which illness characteristics influence interactions 
remains unclear. This longitudinal pilot study investigated spousal 
interactions in AD and stroke situations. Many functional impairments in AD 
and stroke are similar; however, AD is characterized by irreversible, 
progressive cognitive and functional decline, while a stroke is a sudden 
event, and there is potential for recovery during the six month period 
following an acute infarct. This study attempted to answer whether two 
illnesses with similar functional impairments but divergent illness 
trajectories (i.e. downward in AD; upward following a stroke) differentially 
affect spousal interactions and whether quantity and quality of interactions 
are related to longitudinal health changes in care receivers.

Sample and Design: The sample comprised 42 couples (n=84 spouses) equally 
divided between three conditions: 1) Early phase AD (Mini Mental 21); 2) Right 
hemisphere stroke, 12 weeks post infarct (Mini Mental 23); and 3) Healthy 
controls matched by age and length of marriage. Interactions were assessed at 
baseline (T1) and six months later (T2) through home interviews. Measures of 
interactions included companionship, tension, affection, mutuality, and 
commitment (Spanier & Thompson, 1982; Archbold et al., 1990; alpha 
coefficients of subscales ranged from .58 to .91).

Findings: At T1, quantity and quality of interactions were significantly lower 
among AD couples than stroke and control group couples (p<.05). For the stroke 
group, only quality of interactions was negatively affected (<.05). There were 
no significant changes in interactions over six months for all three groups. 
Positive spousal interactions at T1 were significantly related to T2 better 
physical health in AD afflicted spouses (p<.05) and to improved ADL for stroke 
victims (p<.01). Both AD afflicted and stroke victim spouses increased in 
depressive moods between Tl and T2; however, spousal interactions related to 
depressed moods were not in the predicted direction and were more difficult to 
interpret.

Conclusion: It appears that the two divergent illness trajectories 
(progressively downward in AD but potentially upward following a stroke), 
affect spousal interactions differently even at the beginning of each 
trajectory. Nevertheless, higher quantity and quality of interactions seem to 
protect AD afflicted spouses' physical health and improve functional abilities 
in stroke victims. Increased depression despite positive spousal interactions 
may be due to early phase AD afflicted spouses' awareness of loss of 
husband-wife reciprocity and to stroke victim spouses' grief response related 
to sudden, stroke-induced limitations. Nursing implications will be discussed.

