Needs Reported by Family Members of Critically Ill Patients Over Time

Janet Flynn Mulroy

The perceptions of family members about their experiences with critical care 
are important to successful outcomes. The purpose of this descriptive study 
was to investigate the needs of families of patients with prolonged lengths of 
stay in critical care units in a large private metropolitian hospital in the 
Mid-South. A volunteer, convience sample of 45 adults aged 18 or older was 
obtained from family members of critically ill patients whose Theraputic 
Intervention Scoring System (TISS) scores demonstrated high levels of acuity 
at this institution. Each of the volunteering family members was asked to give 
consent after being informed of the purpose of the study, given the 
opportunity to ask questions, and assured of complete confidentiality. The 
instrument used to collect data was the Critical Care Family Needs Inventory 
created by Molter and Leske. The family members were asked to rate on a scale 
of 1-4 how important a need was to them and to answer whether the need was 
currently being met or not being met. A demographic data collection tool was 
also completed. The family members were asked to complete an inventory within 
72 hours of the patient's admission to the intensive care unit and again at 10 
to 14 days. Means were calculated to rank the importance of reported needs for 
the two time periods. The data was analyzed using Student's t-tests to compare 
ratings of needs at the different time frames. T-tests were also used to 
compare changes in rating the importance of needs as length of stay for the 
patient progressed. The results were that the family members of critically ill 
patients in this study reported that their most important needs were 
assurance, proximity and information. The least important needs of these 
family members were comfort and support. The results of this study were 
consistent with previous research. The results of the t-test comparison of 
responses at two different time frames were that there was not a statistically 
significant change in the importance of needs reported by family members over 
time. The responses of the family members regarding whether or not their needs 
were being met demonstrated that needs that ranked as most important were 
being met to a higher degree than the needs that ranked as less important to 
these family members. Additional information obtained from this study was that 
the degree to which the needs were being met for these family members did not 
change significantly over time. This reinforces the concept that the family 
members continued to receive high quality intervention throughout the 
hospitalization. Although it is unrealistic to expect the staff nurse to deal 
with all aspects of family member needs, the knowledge gained from this study 
will assist the nurse in coordinating and prioritizing those interventions for 
the family members.

