Effects of Communication Skills Training on Psychosocial Adjustment Among 
Couples Living with Spinal Cord Injury

Constance Captain

Purpose. In this outcome study of programs designed for couples living with 
spinal cord injury (SCI), a communication skills training program was compared 
with an experiential learning program to determine changes in couples' 
interactions and psychosocial adjustment on standardized measurement 
instruments before and after program participation.

Background. The communication project was predicated on the assumption that if 
a couple could learn to communicate more effectively, they may be better able 
to manage the adjustments that arise with SCI.

The need for a program of this type derives from several sources: (1) adapting 
to SCI reaches far beyond adjusting to the physical alterations of injury; (2) 
recent research findings identify marital stability and a positive family 
environment as critical factors in successful rehabilitation outcomes; (3) a 
communication skills approach offers a promising framework as indicated in 
studies with "normal" couples; and (4) limited formal resources necessitate 
the development of intervention programs that optimize existing supports, such 
as the marital relationship.

Subjects. Seventeen couples with a SCI member were randomly assigned to one of 
the two four-week communication programs. The overall attendance rate was 93%. 
Characteristics of the couples were as follows: (1) 88% were married (for two 
couples the partner was a caregiver), (2) 82.4% of persons with SCI were male, 
(3) average length of marriage was 19.5 years (SD=18.85), (4) average age of 
the SCI person was 52 years (SD=15.2), range 19-73 years), and (5) 58.8% of 
persons with SCI were paraplegic.

Findings. Statistical analyses using repeated measures ANOVAs indicated 
significant improvements in communication behaviors among couples in the 
skills-training program. No group differences were found on self-report 
measures of psychosocial adjustment factors. Secondary analysis of SCI persons 
and partners indicated significant improvement in psychosocial adjustment for 
partners, regardless of program assignment. Couples' scores on a coping 
inventory compared favorably with norms established with couples without 
physical disability. The scores on the psychosocial adjustment measure 
indicated poorer adjustment than that noted in populations with breast cancer 
and heart transplant surgery.

Implications. These data indicate the benefits of communication skills 
programs designed for SCI persons and their partners in improving relationship 
skills and assisting couples to adapt to the demands of SCI. Couples work in 
groups promotes networking among couples and is cost effective.

