High-Risk Sexual Behavior Communication of Teen Partners

Sharon E. Lock, Stephanie Ferguson, and Carol Wise

The specific aim of this study was to describe how males and females in late 
adolescence communicate with their sexual partners about high-risk sexual 
behaviors. A naturalistic approach was used to describe the communication 
process between male and female sexual partners. Participants were recruited 
from a university in the southeastern U.S. Criteria for inclusion were (1) 
male or female, 18 to 20 years old, (2) never pregnant or fathered a child, 
(3) never married, (4) spoke English, (5) had engaged in sexual intercourse. 
Interviews were designed to elicit information about communication between 
sexual partners about high-risk sexual behavior. Eighteen women and 15 men 
participated in the study. The majority of women (n=13) and men (n=11) were 
Caucasian. Three women were African American and two were Asian American. Four 
men were African American. Mean age was 18.94 years old for women and 19 years 
old for men. Participants were paid $10 after the interview was completed. 
Interviews with women were conducted by either the principal invesigator or a 
trained female research assistant. Interviews with men were conducted by a 
trained male research assistant. Interviews were audiotaped and transcribed 
verbatim by an experienced transcriber.

Constant comparative analysis was used to analyze the transcripts. Male and 
female transcripts were analyzed separately. For both men and women, building 
trust was identified as the core variable for communication about high risk 
sexual behavior. Building trust was defined as the process of developing 
confidence that the sexual partner is truthful about his or her sexual 
history. For women antecendents for building trust were nature of the 
relationship, length of the relationship, and indirect gathering of 
information. For men, antecendetns for building trust were nuture of the 
relationship, length of the relationship, and gut feelings. For women, one 
consequence of building trust was safe sex talk. Women were more likely to 
talk about high risk sexual behavior with their partner if they trusted him. 
For women, safe sex talk was influenced by alcohol use, previous sexual 
experiences, a proactive attitude, knowledge, talking with friends, and the 
media. Another consequence of building trust for women was unsafe sex 
practices. Many women perceived that they wer in a monogamous relationship and 
decided it was safe to not use a condom. For men, the consequences of building 
trust was safe sex talk. For men, safe sex talk was influenced by a passive 
attitude. Men were willing to talk about high risk sexual behavior if the 
woman initiated the conversation, but often did not bring up the topic 
themselves. This study provides an understanding of the context of 
communication about high risk sexual behavior among teen partners. Findings of 
this study can serve as a guide for developing nursing strategies for 
promoting more effective communication about high risk sexual behavior among 
teen partners.

