The Role of Interpersonal Communication in the Implementation of HIV-Related 
Sexual Protection

Brenda K. Cobb

Young women are at risk for acquiring disease, such as HIV disease, when 
participating in sexual activities with no protection. The implementation of 
sexual protection often necessitates verbal exchange, either to refuse sexual 
advances from young men or request that they use or allow the use of a condom. 
The purpose of this survey was to invesigate the relationship between 
interpersonal communication and the use of disease-related sexual protective 
practices among heterosexual college women.

Women (N=163), 18 to 22 years of age (mean=18.19) who lived in university 
residence halls, completed the questionnaire. Most wer Caucasian (83%). Almost 
half (49%) of the young women were 16 years of age or younger when they first 
experienced sexual intercourse with a male and 54% have had more than one 
lifetime sexual partner. Respondents were asked to indicate their sexual and 
communication practices with new sexual partners. Eighteen items from the Safe 
Sex Behavior Questionnaire (SSBQ) (DiIorio, Parson, Lehr, & Carlone, 1992) 
were used to measure disease-related sexual protective practices. 
Interpersonal communication was measured with the Information Seeking Scale 
(Kellermann & Reynolds, 1990), Sexual Self-Disclosure Scale (Herold & Way, 
1988) and items from the SSBQ related to communication practices (alpha=.89); 
factor analysis suggested three subscales: General Information Exchange 
(alpha=.85), General Sex Information Communication (alpha=.82), and Sexual 
Safety Information Communication (alpha=.84).

At least 69% of these young women communicated with new sex partners on 
general issues. More detailed discussions of general sexual communication were 
related to the use of contraception (74%), sexual morality (60%) and 
premarital sexual intercourse (58%). Young women frequently sought information 
from new sex partners regarding their sexual history (69%) and previous drug 
use (61%). There was a moderate correlation between the overall measure of 
interpersonal communication and the implementation of disease-related sexual 
protection (r=0.35, p<.001). Young women who communicated more with sexual 
partner(s) implemented more disease-related sexual protective practices. 
Analysis of the interpersonal communication subscales indicated a higher 
correlation between disease-related sexual protection and Sexual Safety 
Information Communication (r=.46, p<.001) than between sexual protective 
practices and General Information Exchange (r=.23, p<.01) and General Sex 
Information (r=.16, p<.04).

Health education programs for young women need to focus on specific sexual 
safety communication practices to enhance their skills in negotiating sexual 
protection. Although general communication practices will likely aid in the 
development of interpersonal understanding in the developing relationship, the 
implementation of sexual protection requires more specific communication.

