Treatment Decision Making by Parents of Pediatric Oncology Patients

L. Oakes, P. Hinds, W. Furman, C. Kolesar, P. Foppiano, J. Gattuso, M. Olson, 
B. Powell, P. Puckett, A. Quargnenti, G. Simpson, and P. Bozeman

The purpose of this descriptive study was to retrospectively identify parental 
decision making processes surrounding difficult treatment decisions for their 
child. Identification of patterns in parental decision making could provide 
health care professionals with information they could use to better assist 
other parents and each other with making such difficult decisions. These 
identified patterns could become the basis of clinical guidelines for use with 
parents facing difficult care decisions.

A retrospective approach was chosen for this initial work to avoid the 
possibility of the research itself altering decisions that parents might 
currently be making for their child. Parents in our pediatric cancer center 
whose child had died during the previous 6 to 24 months (n=89) were invited to 
participate in the study through a detailed letter that included a response 
sheet on which parents could indicate willingness or refusal to participate in 
the telephone interviews. Two nurses trained in interviewing techniques 
conducted all of the telephone interviews and reviewed and critiqued each 
other's interviews. During the interviews, parents were asked to identify the 
difficult decisions they had to make during their child' care and the factors 
they considered during the decision making. They were also asked to identify 
the actions of health care professionals that assisted or hindered them in 
their decision making. Of the eligible parents, 5 were lost to followup, 38 
agreed to participate, 5 refused, and 36 did not respond. The deceased 
children of the participating parents included 19 males and 19 females whose 
ages raged from 1.5 to 23 years. Demographic information was collected on the 
patients of the parents who declined to participate or who did not respond.

All interviews were tape recorded and transcribed. A semantical content 
analysis was completed with the sampling unit being each parent response and 
the recording unit being a theme. An initial set of theoretically justified, 
mutually exclusive categories was developed and tested by four members of the 
research team on the first two interviews. All subsequent interviews were 
coded independently by four coders, and agreement levels by category ranged 
from 68% to 100%. Six major decisions and 72 influencing factors were 
identified by parents. After applying decision rules developed for the 
analysis, 4 to 7 common factors were identified for each decision. One factor 
that was present in each decision was "Receiving Information from Health Care 
Professionals". Two other common irnluencing factors across decisions were 
"Avoiding Further Suffering for my Child" and "Feeling Supported by and Trust 
for Staff".

Study frndings will provide the basis for a prospective study that will 
include the perspectives of the parents, patients, and health care providers. 
Findings will also contribute to the beginning set of clinical guidelines 
related to the role of the health care professional in parent decision making 
about treatment for their ill child.

