Coping with Decision Making by Parents of Children with Cancer: A Secondary 
Analysis of an Existing Qualitative Data Set

Ralph J. Vogel

Parents of children and youths with cancer are asked to make difficult 
treatment-related decisions on behalf of their child. How parents cope with 
their decision making and the outcomes of their decisions may contribute to 
how they later cope with the death of their child. The purpose of this study 
was to examine a existing qualitative data set for ways that parents of now 
deceased children coped with the difficult treatment decisions they made on 
behalf of their child.

The primary study used both quantitative ad qualitative methods 
(semi-structured interviews and a questionnaire) to determine the decisions 
that were most difficult for the parents and what factors they considered in 
their decision making. The interview data from the primary study formed the 
data set for this study which used a secondary analysis as its analytic 
method. In the primary study, 40 parents of 38 deceased patients participated 
in the interviews. Each interview was subsequently coded independently by four 
different members of the research team. In all, eight different coders were 
involved and each reported not coding entire sections of the interviews about 
decision making because those sections were about parental coping with the 
decision making. In the secondary analysis, the original tapes of the 
interviews and line numbered versions of the transcribed tapes were first 
reviewed by a researcher who was not a member of the primary study team. This 
researcher confirmed the impression that parental coping with decision making 
was embedded in the interviews.

The next step involved a conceptual comparison of the major study concept from 
the primary study (decision making) with that of the secondary analysis 
(coping) to determine that the two had shared characteristics. The third step 
consisted of adopting an existing model of coping (Lazarus and Folkman' s 
model) and developing a descriptive table of codes to represent each component 
of the model. This table and three interviews were given to three raters who 
were members of a nursing faculty. The interrater agreement coefficients by 
code and line were consistently less than 50%. Next, two raters involved in 
the primary study were given the table of codes and three interviews to code 
but results again showed inconsistencies by rater and code.

The raters' comments indicated that the coping model did not fit the data. The 
difficulty was determining if that was because of the a) retrospective nature 
of the design (interviewing parents 6 to 24 months after the event may alter 
their recall of the coping process), b) secondary analysis approach (not 
directly inquiring of parents about their coping strategies but gleaning it 
from their interviews), or c) nature of the model. To determine the source of 
the unacceptably low interrater agreement a inductive approach to identify 
parental coping as it exists in the data set was taken. Study findings from 
the secondary analysis will be based on this new approach.

