The Possibilities and the Pitfalls of Doing a Secondary Analysis of a 
Qualitative Data Set

Pamela S. Hinds

Secondary analysis is the use of an existing data set to find answers to a 
research question that differs from the question asked in the original or 
primary study. Secondary analyses of quantitative data sets (such as national 
census track surveys) is a respected, common, and cost-effective approach to 
maximizing the usefulness of the collected data (Cherlin, 1991; Gleit & 
Graham, 1989; Lobo, 1986). In contrast, secondary analysis of qualitative data 
sets has not been an accepted approach (Thorne, 1993) because of concerns 
about the appropriateness of qualitative methods and their resulting data for 
such use, including the need for a close relationship between the researcher 
and the data. If these legitimate concerns can be adequately addressed, 
descriptively rich qualitative data sets that will be underutilized could 
become important sources of information.

The major challenges include determining the exact research question that can 
be validly and accurately asked of an existing qualitative data set, assessing 
the quality of the data set, determining and comparing the nature of the 
concepts of interest in the primary and secondary analyses, adequately 
sensitizing the researchers conducting the secondary analysis to the context 
of the primary study, and providing debriefing experiences for researchers 
conducting the secondary analysis.

A major pitfall is the use of research questions that are broad in scope and 
abstract at the conceptual level. Although that kind of research question is 
appropriate for a primary qualitative study, more defined, limited, and 
specified research questions work best in a secondary analysis of a 
qualitative data set. A related pitfall is not first determining what can be 
asked of the data set. Once the research question has been determined, the 
researcher must then assess whether the question is substantial enough to 
merit the efforts of the secondary analysis. Another pitfall is the use of an 
established framework for analytical purposes. Using the established framework 
may contribute to difficult or unsolvable issues about the primary study 
design, method, or the framework itself. Instead, using an inductive, analytic 
approach is more likely to yield reliable and valid findings from a secondary 
analysis. An additional difficulty is the ethical dilemma of using a data set 
for a purpose other than what the participants in the primary study gave 
consent.

The benefits of conducting a secondary analysis of a qualitative data set 
include the opportunities to 1) discover new information about a phenomenon or 
process that might not have resulted from a direct inquiry, and 2) extend or 
validate findings from the primary study. These benefits may be achieved 
without the costs of conducting a labor-intensive, time consuming qualitative 
study.

