Responses to Symptoms that Affect Eating During Cancer Treatment

Patricia R. Wilson

Changes in food intake and nutritional status may occur at many points in the 
cancer experience and are of concern to both health professionals and persons 
with cancer. Sources of nutritional changes and persons with cancer who are at 
nutritional risk have been identified. Intervention studies to improve food 
intake for nutritionally at-risk groups have reported mixed results, with some 
improvement in food intake for specific groups, but no improvement in long 
term survival or treatment outcome. An accepted method of improving food 
intake during cancer treatment is the management of symptoms that may affect 
eating. However, few studies have provided a detailed description of specific 
symptoms that affect eating or examined the strategies persons with cancer use 
in response to changes in food intake during cancer treatment. The specific 
aims of this study are to describe symptoms that affect eating during cancer 
treatment, to describe changes in eating that occur during treatment, and to 
describe the responses of persons with cancer to changes in eating. Research 
questions for this descriptive study are: 1) What are the patient identified 
symptoms that affect eating during cancer treatment? 2) To what extent do 
identified symptoms change eating? 3) What are the changes that occur in 
eating? and 4) What are the strategies persons with cancer use in response to 
symptoms that change eating? A convenience sample of consenting subjects 
(n=110) undergoing treatment for cancer of the head and neck, lung, or 
gastrointestinal tract at two regional outpatient oncology centers 
participated in this study. During a semi-structured interview, subjects 
identified symptoms that occurred in the previous 24 hours, rated the extent 
to which each symptom changed eating on a vertical visual analog scale (VAS), 
and answered 3 open-ended questions to describe the changes that occurred in 
eating and the actions taken to change the symptom that affected eating. 
Subjects identified 21 symptoms (average of 5 symptoms/subject; range 0-20) 
that occurred in the previous 24 hours and completed a total of 601 VAS (one 
for each identified symptom) to describe the symptom's effect on eating. 
Symptoms that changed eating the most (VAS average scores > 50) included: 
anorexia, taste changes, nausea, dysphagia, and early satiety. Description of 
ways that the symptoms changed eating included: appetite decreased, stopped 
eating, changes in sensation, quantity and type of food eaten, and changes in 
the eating process, method, and length of time to eat. Subjects described an 
average of one strategy per symptom, (range of 1-5 strategies per symptom). 
The described strategies targeted both the symptom (n=498 strategies) and the 
change in eating (n=269 strategies). This presentation will discuss the 
strategies used for symptoms that changed eating the most. The results from 
this study provide important data on the ways symptoms change eating and the 
strategies actually used to improve eating during cancer treatment. This 
information will assist health professionals in the identification of symptoms 
that affect eating and in the design of effective interventions to manage 
symptoms that affect eating and to improve food intake during cancer 
treatment.

