Predictors of Participation in Free Prostate Cancer Screening

Martha S. Tingen and Sally P. Weinrich

Prostate cancer is the most frequently diagnosed cancer in the United States 
and the second leading cause of cancer-related deaths among men. The incidence 
of prostate cancer has increased dramatically over the last 10 years by 50%. 
It is estimated that in 1995, there will be 244,000 new cases of prostate 
cancer in the United States. Additionally, estimates of prostate cancer deaths 
will be 40,400.

The purpose of this descriptive, correlational research was to investigate the 
relationship among selected demographic factors and participation in free 
prostate cancer screening. A conceptual map, representing an amalgamation of 
key constructs from multiple models was developed and provided the framework 
for this research. A randomly selected sample of 249 men, ages 40-70, were 
recruited from churches, barbershops and senior centers in a southeastern 
state. Data on demographic factors was obtained using the Prostate Cancer 
Project Questionnalre. Participation in prostate cancer screening was measured 
by complying with the American Cancer Society's Guidelines, which included 
having a digital rectal exam (DRE) and/or a prostate-specific antigen (PSA) 
blood test. Data analyses included descriptive statistics, correlations, 
chi-square test of independence and logistic regression.

The average participant was African-American, X = 53.7 years, a high school 
graduate and earned between $9,601 to $25,020 per year. Predictors of 
participation in free prostate cancer screening were race, age and income. For 
race, white men, on average, were more likely to participate in free prostate 
cancer screening than African-American men (*p < 0.05). Related to age, older 
men, 60-70 years old, were on average, more likely to participate in free 
prostate cancer screening than younger men (*p < 0.05). Specific to income, 
men whose annual income was > $50,000 were more likely to participate in free 
screening than those who earned between $25,021-$49,999 (*p < 0.05).

Implications of these findings for theoretical and practical perspectives will 
be presented. Additionally, recommendations for future research will be 
identified.
