Prostate Cancer Treatment Selection: A Focus Group Exploration

Maureen O'Rourke and Barbara B. Germino

Introduction: Prostate cancer has emerged as a significant health concern in 
the United States, surpassing lung cancer as the most frequently diagnosed 
malignancy in men. The majority of patients present with an incidental finding 
of a prostatic nodule or an elevated PSA during routine physical examination 
or screening. Such patients and their families are unprepared for the 
diagnosis and the subsequent burden of deciding on treatment. The difficulty 
in the decision process is heightened by the lack of scientific evidence to 
support the choice of one treatment option over another. Side effects such as 
incontinence and impotence represent major threats to quality of life, both 
for the patient and his partner. Numerous studies have serendipitously 
uncovered information regarding family participation in the treatment decision 
process, though none have specifically sought to examine their role. 
Traditional approaches to decision making (e.g. rational choice theory) 
prescribe what the rational person ought to do given certain circumstances, 
but fail to describe or explain behavior as it occurs.

Purpose: The purpose of this pilot study was to explore the decision process 
as retrospectively described by prostate cancer patients and their spouses. 
Additionally, the study was executed to test the feasibility of a larger scale 
prospective examination of decision making in this same population.

Specific Aims: The specific aim of this pilot study was not prediction, but to 
inform a deeper understanding of the decision making process.

Methods: Two focus groups were conducted by the researcher. Group sessions 
lasted 90 minutes and were tape recorded with participants' consent. Twelve 
prostate cancer patients and 6 spouses were purposefully recruited from a 
newly organized prostate cancer support group in an urban North Carolina 
community. Participants ranged in age from 51-72 years. Focus group interviews 
were transcribed verbatim and analyzed using content analysis techniques. 
Validity & reliability were systematically addressed using criteria for 
confirmability, dependability, and credibility. An audit trail was established 
with tapes, fieldnotes, and transcripts. The two investigators worked 
independently on samples of coding to check inter-rater reliability. Data were 
grouped into thematic categories.

Results: Seven themes were constituted from the data: 1) Information seeking; 
2) Barriers to be overcome; 3) Making the choice; 4) Whose decision is this? 
5) Issues of physician trust; 6) Expectancy of the diagnosis; and 7) Living 
with the decision. Specific issues raised by subjects included misconceptions 
about the nature and side effects of radiation treatments, symptom 
recognition, and incomplete information about treatment options upon which to 
base their decision, suggesting areas for future research and educational 
intervention.

