The Effect of a Relaxation With Guided Imagery Nursing Intervention on Breast 
Cancer Patients' Stress
Suzanne W. Gross

Specific Aims: To test the effect of a nursing intervention employing 
relaxation with guided imagery on perceived stress in a clinical trial with 
breast cancer patients. To describe patient characteristics that promoted or 
inhibited the use of relaxation with guided imagery as a nursing intervention 
with this patient population.

Hypothesis: Women with breast cancer who received standardized cancer care 
instruction and a planned relaxation with guided imagery program (CCI + RGI) 
would exhibit less stress during an eight-week chemotherapy regimen than would 
women who received standardized cancer care instruction (CCI) only.

Subjects: 30 white women predominately from rural Appalachia, age 30 to 67, 
who were naive to chemotherapy and were beginning treatment with combination 
chemotherapy 3 to 8 weeks post surgery for Stage I or Stage II breast cancer.

Methods: A prospective, experimental, repeated measures design was used to 
determine differences in stress levels over 8 weeks' time for women randomized 
to experimental condition of CCI + RGI versus women randomized to control 
condition of CCI only. Patients received RGI and/or CCI throughout the study 
period. RGI was by audio tape authored and recorded by the investigator. CCI, 
from nursing protocols developed for this study, was given weekly as needed 
during scheduled telephone contact with each patient. Measures of stress 
included Cohen's Perceived Stress Scale, Profile of Mood States, and the 
Stanford Inventory of Cancer Patient Adjustment. Baseline measurement and 
initial treatment session were completed prior to the start of day 1, cycle 1 
of chemotherapy. Midpoint and endpoint measurement was done in the fifth and 
ninth weeks, respectively. Data analysis was by repeated measures ANOVA.

Findings: There was a significant Group by Time interaction for the subscale 
Coping with Medical Procedures, F(2,56) = 4.00, p = .02. Patients perceived 
RGI to be of benefit as a help to cope. Reported frequency of RGI use ranged 
from 21 to 112 with a mean of 71. The oldest patients reported less use. The 
most common reasons reported by experimental condition patients for less than 
twice a day use were "too sick to concentrate" and "too busy." Two patients 
reported the cancer ideation contained in the RGI script was threatening.

Implications: RGI by audio tape was a simple nursing intervention easily used 
with this patient population. The findings offer limited support for the 
hypothesis and suggest five areas of future research. Two direct clinical 
application recommendations for improved nursing practice are discussed.

