Socialization and Distance Learning Programs

Bonita R. Reinert

According to a recent survey, 135 schools (38%) of the members of AACN 
currently offer some form of distance learning classes. A total of 75 schools 
offer graduate coursework. According to additional findings from that survey, 
the number of graduate distance learning programs have increased of 837% in 
the last ten years. Despite the increased numbers of off-campus graduate 
programs, however, little research has been conducted to study socialization 
in off-campus programs. Since graduate distance learning programs prepare 
future leaders and educators, it is critical that we understand, plan for, and 
evaluate the socialization process. The purpose of this study was to examine 
the concept of socialization from the perspective of schools offering graduate 
distance learning classes.

The study was descriptive in nature. An introductory letter, questionnaire, 
and stamped, self-addressed envelope were mailed to the Deans of AACN member 
schools which offer distance learning graduate courses. The questionnaire used 
in the study was developed by the researcher and consisted of eight open-ended 
questions. Informants were asked to discuss the components of socialization, 
how to facilitate socialization, how to measure the presence of socialization, 
and how to insure socialization occurs in distance learning programs.

Thirty-five schools (45%) returned their questionnaires. Responses for each of 
the questions were examined using content analysis. The framework that guided 
the initial analysis was the Stages of Professional Socialization Model 
developed by Corcoran & Shirley (1988). Preliminary analysis identified the 
following components of socialization: identification with the profession, 
identification of self as an APN, identification with a practice model, and 
adoption of a theoretical and research base for their practice. Categories of 
strategies to facilitate socialization included both formal and informal 
interactions designed to help the student develop an inquiring mind and a 
personal practice model. Eighteen schools (64%) mentioned concerns about 
socialization and distance learning programs. Twelve schools (34%) had 
students come to campus for planned events as a way to address socialization 
needs. Many respondents were unsure how to measure socialization. The most 
common responses included student satisfaction, faculty evaluation, and 
professional behaviors following graduation.

According to Corcoran & Shirley and data from this study, graduate students 
must be exposed to essential resources, as well as informal and formal 
interactions with peers and successful role models to insure profession 
socialization. Those needs are especially difficult to meet when students 
complete entire degrees at off-campus sites. Based on findings from this 
study, more understanding and planning is needed to insure socialization 
occurs in graduate nursing distance learning programs.

