Benefits of Enrollment Management for Program Planning, Implementation and 
Marketing

Marilyn B. Chassie

Specific Aims: The purpose of this research was to test the application of 
enrollment management principles to the administration of a graduate program 
in nursing. The presentation will address the concept of enrollment 
management, dimensions of a successful enrollment management program, and 
findings from this research on implementation of a computer-based application 
for enrollment management in a College of Nursing at a major southeastern 
university. Implications of applying enrollment management principles in 
graduate nursing education for student and faculty recruitment, advisement, 
program planning, course scheduling, and program evaluation will be discussed.

Research Questions: What are costs and benefits of implementing a data-based 
system for enrollment management in a graduate program in nursing?

Method: A pre-test, post-test design was applied in this evaluation research. 
Prior to and following implementation of an enrollment management system, data 
pertaining to program inquiries, applications, time from program admission to 
degree completion, faculty/student ratios, and program, course and section 
offerings were collected. Secondary data relative to graduate faculty 
productivity in all academic units of the university were obtained. 
Descriptive statistics, chi-square analyses and t-tests were used to compare 
pre- and post-intervention data, and to compare pre- and post-intervention 
College of Nursing productivity data to similar data from other academic units 
on campus.

Findings: Implementation of an enrollment management program reduced the 
number of courses offered per semester, as well as the number of courses 
scheduled and later canceled due to undersubscription. The average enrollment 
per graduate nursing course increased following implementation of the 
enrollment management system, as did the ratio of students taught per faculty 
member. However, the number of classroom hours per faculty member declined. 
Specific findings related to recruitment, retention, time for degree 
completion, program planning and delivery, and productivity data changes 
relative to other academic units will be discussed.

Conclusions/Implications: Implementation of an effective enrollment management 
program has implications for improved planning, consistent communication, cost 
reduction, and conservation of faculty resources in graduate nursing 
education. Graduate faculty under pressure to teach, maintain advanced 
practice skills, conduct research, and provide community service can benefit 
from a system for managing enrollments to maximize use of their teaching 
talents and duplication of effort. Further, both students and faculty can 
benefit from program planning and advanced schedule projection for courses 
required in various programs of study. Finally, data derived from an 
enrollment management system can be used to target student and faculty 
recruitment efforts and focus the marketing plan of the institution.

