The Effect of Two Teaching Methods on College Nursing Students' Factual 
Knowledge and Performance of Psychomotor Skills

Sue A. Beeson

The purpose of this study was to compare the effect of two teaching methods 
(interactive video and formal lecture/linear video) on college nursing 
students' factual knowledge about blood pressure and their ability to perform 
blood pressure measurement.

With increased emphasis on learning clinical nursing skills before performing 
them in a patient-care setting and the demand on faculty time for teaching 
these skills, the most effective and efficient teaching methods must be 
determined. Interactive video appears to be an exciting and innovative new way 
to teach these skills, but studies have focused mainly on cognitive 
achievement and have produced mixed findings. Some have found that learning of 
cognitive content by interactive video was no different from traditional 
methods, but other studies have found that students scored higher with 
interactive video presentation.

This study used a pretest-posttest analysis of covariance design. College 
nursing students (N=104) with no previous experience in blood pressure 
measurement were randomly assigned to: a formal lecture/linear video teaching 
method or an interactive video teaching method. A 14-item multiple-choice test 
of factual knowledge was administered to both groups immediately before and 
after treatment. A 20-item performance checklist was used to evaluate 
students' ability to perform blood pressure measurement after treatment.

Students taught by the formal lecture/linear video method gained significantly 
more factual knowledge than students taught by interactive video. However, 
there was no significant difference between groups on performance of blood 
pressure measurement.

Results of this study were somewhat unexpected and indicate that faculty 
contact through the formal lecture/linear video method still may be the most 
effective way to teach students facts about skills. Limitations of the study 
must be taken into consideration, but educators should use caution in 
discarding traditional approaches to teaching. Since interactive video was as 
effective as formal lecture on performance of blood pressure measurement, 
possibly combining the two methods would be a logical approach. More studies 
are needed to further investigate effectiveness of new technologies used in 
teaching nursing students, especially in the psychomotor domain.

