Effects of Multiple Environmental Distracters on Wayfinding

Barbara Therrien and Robert Hill

This study explored the effects of multiple environmental distracters on 
wayfinding ability using an established model of disorientation. Adult male 
(n=24) and female (n=23) rats received bilateral hippocampal lesions or sham 
surgery (controls). Animals had completed an initial wayfinding task with an 
audio-visual cue and one visual distracter. In this study, four additional 
distracters were introduced into the test environment. Comparison of the final 
days of the two protocols showed the animals to be more distracted by multiple 
distracters than by a single one. The directional heading error was greater 
with multiple distracters (X=54.6 degress) than with the single distracter 
(X=47.1 degress). Lesioned ainmals were more distractible when compared to 
controls (X=56.6 degress vs X=51.6 degress, respectively). Interestingly, time 
taken to reach the goal was comparable between male controls and male 
bilateral lesioned animals, but the females with hippocampal (HPC) damage took 
significantly more time to reach the goal. We concluded that, in the presence 
of multiple environmental distracters, wayfinding performance of all animals 
was more impaired than with one distracter. There was no progressive 
improvement in directional heading error or time taken to reach the goal for 
all groups over the four days of testing. It appeared that female animals were 
more distractible than males, and female animals with bilateral hippocampal 
lesions were most impaired. We then examined mean swim time for female animals 
with high estrogen levels (proeserus or estrus) versus those with low estrogen 
levels (metestrus or diestrus). No significant differences were apparent 
between the two control groups. Interestingly, females with bilateral HPC 
damage in proestrus or estrus on the first testing day, performed as well as 
controls over the four test days. In contrast, females with bilateral damage, 
beginning the learning task in metestrus or diesrus, took two to three times 
as long to locate the goal on all test days. These data strongly suggest that 
estrogen levels influence spatial learning and distractibility.

