Living with Alzheimer's Dementia: Management and Treatment of Urinary 
Incontinence

Bette D. Pearson and Ruth E. McShane

Urinary incontinence (UI) is well recognized as one of the most prevalent and 
costly conditions among cognitively impaired nursing home (NH) residents. UI 
is present in about 53% of NH residents, although the prevelence in NHs has 
ranged from as low as 40% to as high as 82%, depending upon the operational 
definition, case mix, and settings where the studies were conducted. The 
increasing number of cognitively impaired NH residents that are affected by 
urinary incontinence (UI) necessitate a more complete scientific understanding 
of this condition. Conclusions that can be drawn from the few prior studies 
have been limited by salient methodological problems, especially small sample 
sizes, short follow-up periods, and failure to provide a complete assessment 
or evaluate the impact of risk factors, physical causes, environmental 
factors, and cognitive abilities.

Designed to address these gaps in our understanding of UI in cognitively 
impaired NH residents, this prospective project will implement UI management 
with cognitively impaired NH residents and NH staff who care for them through 
education, assessment, diagnosis, treatment, and evaluation. The specific aims 
are to: 1) educate cognitively impaired NH residents, their family and 
friends, and staff about UI; 2) encourage reporting of established UI by NH 
residents, families, and staff; and 3) improve detection, assessment, 
diagnosis, management and treatment of UI by nurses and other health care 
providers.

The management protocols will be evaluated on an ongoing basis to assess 
resident comfort using the following outcome criteria: 1) Resident continence 
levels will improve. 2) Resident social behaviors will increase including 
voluntary participation in small group activities. 3) Family satisfaction with 
care will increase as families understand the continence program. 4) Clear 
management protocols will increase quality and efficiency of care. 5) Factors 
contributing to or resulting from UI will be identified. 6) NH staff stress 
will decrease related to caring for cognitively impaired residents with UI.

