Measuring Family Satisfaction with Care in Long-Term Care Settings

Meridean L. Maas, D. S. Brenneman, and D. Reed

Family satisfaction with care is one indicator of the quality of care provided 
to persons in nursing homes. For residents too cognitively impaired to 
critique their care themselves, it may serve as proxy for their own evaluation 
of the care, but family members may give mixed and even contradictory 
indications about satisfaction with care. This poster will focus on assessment 
of family satisfaction with care in long-term care settings. It will use data 
from a quasi-experimental, longitudinal study designed to test the effects of 
a specific nursing intervention, the Family Involvement in Care intervention 
on family and staff in long-term care settings. The sample is composed of 90 
family members of nursing home residents with Alzheimer's Disease or Related 
Disorders (ADRD). They are from eight midwestern facilities, representing 
public, private-for-profit, and private nonprofit settings. Satisfaction with 
care is measured through both quantitative and qualitative methods. The Family 
Perceptions of Care Tool (FPCT) is a 51-item questionnaire measuring four 
areas of family member perceptions, including satisfaction with physical care 
for the resident with Alzheimer's Disease and the quality of staff 
relationships with family members. Satisfaction with care is further measured 
in semi-structured, open-ended interviews conducted by research staff with 
each family member three times during a nine-month period. Preliminary results 
after one year of study will be shared in the form of descriptive statistics 
for the FPCT and qualitative analysis of the interviews. Family members 
express high levels of satisfaction for the most part. Complaints exist, but 
they are veiled, qualified, and excused away. The reluctance of family 
member's to express satisfaction directly presents a barrier to measurement. 
The reasons for this barrier and strategies for overcoming it will be 
presented.

