Development of an Instrument to Assess Problem Behavior in First Grade 
Students Prenatally Exposed to Cocaine

Chadice Covington, V. Delaney-Black, T. Templin, R. Sokol, J. Ager, and J. 
Knoll

Teachers report that children exposed prenatally to cocaine display unique 
academic, social and conduct problems in the school setting. No measure nor 
data exist that specifically identify these alleged behaviors. Three 
hypotheses were developed to reflect the state of knowledge regarding problem 
behaviors in the classroom setting. First, that the problem behaviors of 
cocaine-exposed children differ completely from archetypic problem behaviors; 
2nd that these behaviors do not differ from general problem behaviors and 
finally that these behaviors overlap archetypic behavior commonly assessed in 
the classroom. To test these hypotheses, 24 elementary school teachers 
participated in a consensus process to identify first grade student behaviors 
considered specific to prenatal cocaine exposure. The mean for teaching first 
grade was 10 years (range 1-20) and 71% held a Master's degree. The Problem 
Behavior Scale (PROBS), a 14-item, visual analogue scale, was developed from 
the consensus behavior classifications generated. Teachers then assessed 
students (N=140) with the PROBS and the Conners' Teacher Rating Scale (CTRS). 
Internal consistency was assessed for the PROBS with inter-item correlations 
(mean=.65; range .35 to .86). The coefficient a for the scale was .96. 
Concurrent validity was established between the PROBS and the CTRS. The total 
scores for the two were highly correlated (r=.86). Factor analysis of the two 
scales yielded two factors: hyperactivity-impulsivity, composed of both CTRS 
and PROBS items, and central processing factor, composed of only PROBS items. 
In summary, teachers reported problem behaviors among students believed to be 
cocaine exposed that reflect conduct as well as central processing. 
Differences exist between the PROBS and the CTRS assessments. The PROBS 
measured additional variance in problem behaviors beyond that assessed by the 
CTRS. These findings suggest support to the hypothesis that cocaine exposed 
students have both archetypical and unique behaviors. On going instrument 
development is addressing predictive validity of the PROBS in identifying 
cocaine exposed children.

